]BANK OF BARODAI
•
KNOW YOUR CUSTOMER (KYC) / ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMl) / COMBATING FINANCING OF TERO RI SM (CFTf' ·,.
lQUESTIONNAIREI " ·, ·-,- ,
,.
1 Full name of Financial Institution BANK OF BARODA
2 legal Form of Financial Institution
3 SWIFT Address of Financial Institution BARBINBBXXX
4 Full Address of the registered office Baroda House, P.B No. 506, Mandvi,Baroda-
390006.
Telephone Number
Fax Number 0265-2316792
Website www.bankofbaroda.in
5 Country of Incorporation INDIA
7 Principal business activity Retail and Corporate Banking.
8 Banking license No & Date BOM-6 dated 20th JULY 1908
9 Principal local Regulator RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
10 Name of External Auditor(s)
11 Are your shares publicly traded? ~ Yes ONo
12 Please provide list of shareholders having more than 25% N.A.
ownership in your institution:
13 Please confirm the areas of your organization covered by
this questionnaire:
a) Head Office & Domestic branches : ~Yes ONo
b) Domestic subsidiaries:
~Yes ONo
c) Overseas branches:
d) Overseas subsidiaries: ~Yes ONo
If you answered "No" to any of the items above, please
explain as to how does your institution's policies, ~Yes- ONo
procedures and monitoring specifically outline how to
mitigate the potential risks associated with it.
,..__
14 Does your institution maintain physical presence in the ~Yes ONo
licensing country
15 Is your Institution an Agency, Branch or Subsidiary of a OYes ~No
Bank with a physical presence?
If yes, please answer the following questions:
1. Name of Affiliate/ Parent Company:
2. Is Affiliate/ Parent Company publicly traded?
If Yes, List the Exchange/s & Symbols
3. Indicate Affiliation: Agency? Branch? Subsidiary?
Physical presence means your institution maintains a
physical place of business, other that an electronic address,
in a country where it is authorised to conduct banking
activities, at which it employs at least one employee on a
full time basis and maintains records of its banking
activities, and is subject to supervision by the regulators of
the country authorizing the institutions license.
Please list the names of the Principal Officers and Directors Principal officer: Mr. Pankaj Mittal, General Manager
16. of your institution, their respective positions and the (OPERATIONS & SERVICES).
number of years they have been employed by the
Details of our directors are available on our website:
Institution.
www.bankofbaroda.in
SECTION 2: ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING QUESTIONNAIRE
I. REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT
Is money laundering a criminal offence in the [8JYes
LJ No
country where the institution is located? Has your
country established laws designed to prevent
money laundering and terrorist financing
17.
If No, has your institution designed policies to
prevent money laundering and terrorist financing
and is it in accordance with the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF )'s recommendations?
Do the laws and regulations in your country
prohibit your institution from :
18. a. Open/maintain anonymous or numbered
[8Jves
accounts? ONo
b. Conduct business with Shell banks (i.e. [8Jves
ONo
banks with no physical presence in any
jurisdiction)?
1
n.Sanctions
19. Does your Fl check existing and prospective customers and monitor all transaction
against the UN, US, EU sanctions or other applicable official lists?
a)lf ,Yes ,Please specify if or how SWIFT message are monitored [8Jves
b) If yes, are all confirmed matches reported to competent authority? [8Jves
20 Do you provide directly or indirectly services for customers under UN, US, EU
sanctions? If yes, Please specify. Oves [8J No
21 Do you Provide directly or indirectly services for customers registered in countries
under UN, US or EU sanctions?
Oves [8J No .,
If yes, Please specify?
Ill. INSTITUTION'S AML POLICIES AND PRACTICES
-
22. Does your institution have written policies and internal procedures and controls
reasonably designed to prevent and detect money laundering/terrorist financing ~Yes 0No
activities?
23 Does your institution's AML policies and program have clearly defined roles,
responsibilities and accountabilities as they relate to anti-money laundering ~Yes 0No
compliance?
24 Does your institution have an Anti-Money Laundering Officer or equivalent
responsible for coordinating/monitoring compliance with AML requirement?
~Yes QNo
If yes, please provide the details mentioned below:
Name : Mr Pankaj Mittal
Title : General Manager(Operations & services)
Mailing Address : 7th floor, Operations & Services,Baroda
Bhavan,Alkapuri,Vadodara, G ujarat-390007
Telephone Number : 0265-2316095.
Fax Number
Email Address : gm.oQs.ho@bankofbaroda.com
Does your institution's AML/CFT program include the following:
25. a. A requirement for periodic approval of your institution's AML/CFT policy by □
~Yes No
your institution's Board or senior committee?
b. Customer identification requirements at the inception of the relationship? If
yes, are these requirements in line with the Financial Action Task Force ~Yes 0No
(FATF) standards?
c. A risk-based assessment of your customer(s) ·and their transactions? If yes,
~Yes 0No
how often the customer risk assessment program is updated?
Half-Yearly
d. Policies and procedures for updating customer information periodically?
~Yes 0No
e. Enhanced Know Your Customer (KYC) routines in relation to the following:
i. Dealings with individuals, companies and institutions located in
~Yes 0No
or dealing with high risk countries
ii. Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) ~Yes 0No
iii. Non face to face business relationships ~Yes 0No
iv. Customers (other than those mentioned above) who are ~Yes LJ No
assessed to be high risk customers concerning the risk of money •
laundering and terrorist financing?
f. Established controls to reasonably identify the origin of funds to a 0Yes
customer's account?
g. Permit transaction with non-established or walk in customers? 0Yes
If yes, does your institution have customer identification requirements for
such Customers, please specify. Yes
h. Procedures to monitor large cash deposits and withdrawals? 0Yes
i. Providing complete information for all payments transactions, including
0Yes
sender and beneficiary names, addresses, account numbers and purpose?
j. Established method for monitoring and reporting suspicious activities?
0Yes
0No
k. Screening customer against the names appearing in relevant regulatory 0Yes
blacklists?
I. Record retention requirements for documentation obtained regarding the
IX]Yes
customer?
If Yes, how long are records retained?
5 years
m. Policies prohibiting business with shell banks (i.e. banks with no physical
0Yes
presence in any jurisdiction)?
n. Periodic Anti-Money Laundering Training Programs? 0Yes
If yes, how frequently is the training conducted?
Annually
D Quarterly D Bi-Annually D Annually ✓others
o. Retention of records pertaining to training sessions including attendance
0Yes
records and relevant training material used?
p. Policy and procedures for independent audit or testing of the anti-money
0Yes
laundering compliance program?
Yearly by our
If Yes, how frequently are these audits/tests conducted and by whom?
Periodically Inspection &
audit unit.
q. Policies to reasonably ensure that it only operates with correspondent banks 0Yes
that possess licenses to operate in the countries of their origin?
r. Policies prohibiting any third party to have direct access to your account with 0Yes
your Correspondent Banks? 0No
s. Policies protecting employees, if they report in good faith any suspicious 0Yes
activities/transactions? 0No
If you answered "No" to any of the items above, please explain the policies and
procedures implemented to mitigate the potential risks associated with it.
26 Is your institution able to provide relevant customer identification information on 0ves 0No
request to any correspondent bank (if required)?
Do you gather sufficient information about the respondent institution to
27 0ves
understand their business, reputation, quality of supervision and regulatory
controls?
0ves
28 Has your institution had any regulatory or criminal In the year 2016, RBI had imposed
enforcement actions resulting from violations of
penalty on the bank for the
anti-money laundering laws or regulations OR has
deficiencies in its KYC AML processes
your institution, been the subject of any
and procedures.
investigation, indictment, conviction or civil
enforcement action related to financing terrorists
In the same matter, FIU-IND has also
in the past five years? imposed a penalty on the Bank against
If Yes, please provide more details. which bank made an appeal before the
Appellate Tribunal, PMLA.
Also, on 18/11/2019, RBI had imposed
penalty for not undertaking
periodical review of the risk
categorization in the accounts of
customer,
However, bank has modified its system
accordingly and placed various checks
in the system to prevent such
instances to re-occur.
0ves D
No
29 Does your Institution comply with FATF special
Recommendation VII?
If No, when do you propose to comply with it
COMMENTS ( If any}:
I confirm that, to the best of my knowledge, the above information is current, accurate and reflective of my
30
institution's anti-money laundering policies and procedures.
Name Pankaj Mittal
General Manager (Operations & Services}
Title
Signature
(Authorized Signatory)
Location Vadodara,Gujarat
Date 20-07-2022