KYC-AML-CFT POLICY-2023-24
Updated as on 15-01-2024
1. Introduction
Bank has in place a policy on KNOW YOUR CUSTOMER (KYC) norms and ANTI MONEY LAUNDERING (AML)
measures approved by the Board in its meeting. The policy was based on guidelines issued by RBI.
The KYC guidelines have regularly been revisited by RBI in the context of the recommendations made by the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on Anti Money Laundering (AML) standards and on Combating Financing
of Terrorism (CFT) and has advised banks to follow certain customer identification procedure for opening of
accounts and monitoring transactions of suspicious nature for the purpose of reporting it to appropriate
authority. RBI has advised banks to put in place a policy on 'Know Your Customer' and ‘Anti-Money
Laundering’ measures including the above referred recommendations with the approval of the Board and
shall take steps to implement the provisions of the aforementioned Act and Rules, issued in pursuance of
such amendment(s). RBI has issued the guidelines under Section 35A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and
Rule 7 of Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records of the Nature and Value of Transactions,
the Procedure and Manner of Maintaining and Time for Furnishing Information and Verification and
Maintenance of Records of the Identity of the Clients of the Banking Companies, Financial Institutions and
Intermediaries) Rules, 2005 along with amendments to the PML Act and any contravention thereof or non-
compliance may attract penalties under Banking Regulation Act.
This policy has been compiled covering the guidelines issued by RBI/GOI up to 15 January 2024.
2. Objective
To lay down policy framework for abiding by the Know Your Customer Norms and Anti-Money Laundering
Measure as set out by Reserve Bank of India, based on the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) and the paper issued on Customer Due Diligence (CDD) for banks issued by the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision.
To prevent the Bank from being used, intentionally or unintentionally, by criminal elements for money
laundering or terrorist financing activities.
To enable the Bank to know / understand its customers and their financial dealings better, which in turn
would help it to manage its risks prudently.
Bank shall ensure that a group-wide policy is implemented for the purpose of discharging obligations under
the provisions of Chapter IV of the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003).
Bank’s policy framework should seek to ensure compliance with PML Act/Rules, including regulatory
instructions in this regard and should provide a bulwark against threats arising from money laundering,
terrorist financing, proliferation financing and other related risks. While ensuring international
practices taking into account the FATF standards and FATF guidance notes, for managing risks better.
To put in place appropriate controls for detection and reporting of suspicious activities in accordance
with applicable laws / laid down procedures and regulatory guidelines.
To take necessary steps to ensure that the relevant staff are adequately trained in KYC/AML
procedures.
The Board approved policy on KYC/AML/CFT is subject to annual review.
3. Scope
This policy is applicable across all Branches/offices of the Bank and is to be read in conjunction with related
operational guidelines issued from time to time.
The contents of the policy shall be subject to the changes / modifications which may be advised by RBI
and / or by any regulators and / or by Bank from time to time
4. Definitions
1. Aadhaar Number
“Aadhaar number” means an identification number issued to an individual by submitting the demographic
information such as Name, Date of birth (verified) or age (declared), Gender, Address, Mobile Number
(optional), email ID (optional) and biometric information such as Ten Fingerprints, Two Iris Scans and Facial
Photograph. It is 12-digit random number issued by Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
2. Act and Rules
“Act” and “Rules” means the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 and the Prevention of Money-
Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005, respectively and amendments thereto
3. Authentication
“Authentication”, in the context of Aadhaar authentication, means the process by which the Aadhaar
number along with the demographic information or biometric information of Aadhaar number holder is
submitted to the Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) for its verification.
4. Beneficial Owner (BO)
a) Where the customer is a company, the beneficial owner is the natural person(s), who, whether
acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical persons, has/have a controlling ownership
interest or who exercise control through other means.
Explanation- For the purpose of this sub-clause-
i) “Controlling ownership interest” means ownership of/entitlement to more than 10 percent of the
shares or capital or profits of the company.
ii) “Control” shall include the right to appoint majority of the directors or to control the management
or policy decisions including by virtue of their shareholding or management rights or shareholders
agreements or voting agreements.
b) Where the customer is a partnership firm, the beneficial owner is the natural person(s), who,
whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical person, has/have ownership
of/entitlement to more than 15 percent of capital or profits of the partnership.
c) Where the customer is an unincorporated association or body of individuals, the beneficial owner
is the natural person(s), who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical person,
has/have ownership of/entitlement to more than 15 percent of the property or capital or profits of the
unincorporated association or body of individuals.
Explanation: Term ‘body of individuals’ includes societies. Where no natural person is identified under (a),
(b) or (c) above, the beneficial owner is the relevant natural person who holds the position of senior
managing official.
d) Where the customer is a trust, the identification of beneficial owner(s) shall include identification of
the author of the trust, the trustee, the beneficiaries with 10 percent or more interest in the trust and any
other natural person exercising ultimate effective control over the trust through a chain of control or
ownership.
5. Certified Copy
“Certified Copy” – Obtaining a certified copy by the branch shall mean comparing the copy of the proof of
possession of Aadhaar number where offline verification cannot be carried out or officially valid document
so produced by the customer with the original and recording the same on the copy by the authorized officer
of the branch.
Provided that in case of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) and Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs), as defined in Foreign
Exchange Management (Deposit) Regulations, 2016 {FEMA 5(R)}, alternatively, the original certified copy,
certified by any one of the following, may be obtained:
a) Authorized officials of overseas branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks registered in India,
b) Branches of overseas banks with whom Indian banks have relationships,
c) Notary Public abroad,
d) Court Magistrate,
e) Judge,
f) Indian Embassy/Consulate General in the country where the non-resident customer resides.
6. Central KYC Records Registry (CKYCR)
“Central KYC Records Registry” is a reporting entity which is owned, controlled and authorized by the Central
Government through official notification in the official gazette to safeguard the KYC records in the digital
form and perform such functions as may be required. It includes receiving, storing and retrieving the KYC
records of the clients.
7. Correspondent Banking
Correspondent banking is the provision of banking services by one bank (the “correspondent bank”) to
another bank (the “respondent bank”). Respondent banks may be provided with a wide range of services,
including cash management (e.g., interest-bearing accounts in a variety of currencies), international wire
transfers, cheque clearing, payable-through accounts and foreign exchange services.
8. Customer
For the purpose of KYC Norms, a “Customer” is defined as a person who is engaged in a financial transaction
or activity with the Bank and includes a person on whose behalf the person who is engaged in the transaction
or activity, is acting.
9. Customer Due Diligence (CDD)
Customer Due Diligence (CDD) means identifying and verifying the customer and the beneficial owner.
10. Designated Director
“Designated Director" means a person designated by the Bank to ensure overall compliance with the
obligations imposed under chapter IV of the PML Act and the Rules. Bank has appointed Executive
Director of Bank as Designated Director.
11. Digital KYC
“Digital KYC” means the capturing live photo of the customer and officially valid document or the proof of
possession of Aadhaar, where offline verification cannot be carried out, along with the latitude and longitude
of the location where such live photo is being taken by an authorized officer of the branch. The detailed
process of digital KYC is explained in ANNEXURE I.
12. Digital Signature
A digital signature is an electronic signature that can be used to authenticate the identity of the sender of a
message or the signer of a document, and to ensure that the original content of the message or document
that has been sent is unchanged. Digital signatures are easily transportable, cannot be imitated by someone
else, and can be automatically time stamped. A digital signature can be used with any kind of message,
whether it is encrypted or plaintext.
“Digital Signature” authenticate any electronic record by a sender by means of an electronic method or
procedure subject to the provisions:
a) Any sender may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature
b) The authentication of electronic record shall be effected by the use of asymmetric crypto system
and hash function which develop and transform the initial electronic record into another electronic record.
Explanation: "hash function" means an algorithm mapping or translation of one sequence of bits into
another, generally smaller, set known as "hash result" such that an electronic record yields the same hash
result every time the algorithm is executed with the same electronic record as its input making it
computationally infeasible:
i) To derive or reconstruct the original electronic record from the hash result produced by the
algorithm;
ii) That two electronic records can produce the same hash result using the algorithm.
c) Any person by the use of a public key of the sender can verify the electronic record.
d) The private key and the public key are unique to the sender and constitute a functioning key pair.
13. Enhanced Due Diligence (EDD)
Any additional due diligence measures undertaken over and above the standard level of due diligence is
termed as Enhanced Due Diligence. EDD can be applied at the product level or customer type level where
the suspicion of money laundering or terrorist financing is high. Some of the parameters which can be used
for enhanced due diligence are:
a) Customer location
b) Nature of business /occupation;
c) Transactions in line with the business activity / occupation;
d) Number and value of transaction;
e) Public domain checks for adverse media news on customer Indicative examples of what can
constitute Enhanced Due Diligence
I. Obtaining additional identifying information from a wider variety or more robust sources and
using the information to inform the individual customer risk assessment.
II. Carrying out additional searches (e.g., verifiable adverse media searches) to inform the individual customer
risk assessment.
III. Verifying the source of funds or wealth involved in the business relationship to be satisfied that they do
not constitute the proceeds from crime.
Seeking additional information from the customer about the purpose and intended nature of the business
relationship.
14. Equivalent e-document
“Equivalent e-document” means an electronic equivalent of a document, issued by the issuing authority of
such document with its valid digital signature including documents issued to the digital locker account of the
customer as per rule 9 of the Information Technology (Preservation and Retention of Information by
Intermediaries Providing Digital Locker Facilities) Rules, 2016. Equivalent e-document has also been
permitted for accounts of non-individual customers.
15. Group
The term “group" shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (e) of sub-section (9) of section 286 of
the Income-tax Act,1961 (43 of 1961).
16. Know Your Customer (KYC) Identifier
“Know Your Customer (KYC) Identifier” means the unique number or code assigned to a customer by the
Central KYC Records Registry.
17. Non face to face customer
“Non-face-to-face customers” means customers who open accounts without visiting the branch/offices or
meeting the branch officials.
18. Non-profit Organisations (NPO)
A Non Profit Organizations (NPO) means any entity or organization, constituted for religious or charitable
purposes referred to in clause (15) of section 2 of the Income-tax At, 1961 (43 of 1961), that is registered as a
Trust or a Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or any similar State Legislation or a
company registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)
19. Officially valid Document (OVD)
Officially Valid Document” (OVD) means the passport, the driving licence, proof of possession of Aadhaar
number, the Voter's Identity Card issued by the Election Commission of India, job card issued by NREGA duly
signed by an officer of the State Government and letter issued by the National Population Register
containing details of name and address.
Provided that,
a. where the customer submits his proof of possession of Aadhaar number as an OVD, he may submit it
in such form as are issued by the Unique Identification Authority of India.
b. where the OVD furnished by the customer does not have updated address, the following documents
or the equivalent e-documents thereof shall be deemed to be OVDs for the limited purpose of proof of
address:-
i. utility bill which is not more than two months old of any service provider (electricity, telephone, post-
paid mobile phone, piped gas, water bill);
ii. Property or Municipal tax receipt;
iii. Pension or family pension payment orders (PPOs) issued to retired employees by Government
Departments or Public Sector Undertakings, if they contain the address;
iv. letter of allotment of accommodation from employer issued by State Government or Central
Government Departments, statutory or regulatory bodies, public sector undertakings, scheduled
commercial banks, financial institutions and listed companies and leave and licence agreements with such
employers allotting official accommodation;
c. the customer shall submit OVD with current address within a period of three months of submitting
the documents specified at ‘b’ above
d. where the OVD presented by a foreign national does not contain the details of address, in such case
the documents issued by the Government departments of foreign jurisdictions and letter issued by the
Foreign Embassy or Mission in India shall be accepted as proof of address.
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, a document shall be deemed to be an OVD even if there is a
change in the name subsequent to its issuance provided it is supported by a marriage certificate issued by
the State Government or Gazette notification, indicating such a change of name.
20. Offline Verification
“Offline verification” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (pa) of section 2 of the Aadhaar
(Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016). Offline
verification is defined as a process of verifying the identity of an individual through offline modes. The
modes for offline verification have not been specified and left upon Unique Identification Authority of India
(UIDAI) to specify, by means of regulations.
During offline verification, the branches / bank must:
a) Obtain the consent of the individual,
b) Inform them of alternatives to sharing information, and Not to collect, use or store Aadhaar number
or biometric information.
21. On-going Due Diligence
“On-going Due Diligence” means regular monitoring of transactions in accounts to ensure that they are
consistent with the customers’ profile and source of funds.
22. Payable-through accounts
The term payable-through accounts refers to correspondent accounts that are used directly by third parties
to transact business on their own behalf.
23. Periodic Updation
“Periodic Updation” means steps taken to ensure that documents, data or information collected under the
CDD process is kept up-to-date and reviews the existing records at periodicity prescribed by the Reserve
Bank of India.
24. Person
“Person” has the same meaning assigned in the Act and includes:
a) an individual,
b) a Hindu undivided family,
c) a company,
d) a firm,
e) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not,
f) Every artificial juridical person, not falling within any one of the above persons (a to e), and
g) Any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any of the above persons (a to f).
25. Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs)
“Politically Exposed Persons” (PEPs) are individuals who are or have been entrusted with prominent public
functions by a foreign country, including the Heads of States/Governments, senior politicians, senior
government or judicial or military officers, senior executives of state-owned corporations and important
political party officials.
26. Principal Officer
“Principal Officer” means an officer appointed by the bank, responsible for furnishing information as per
rule 8 of the Rules.
27. Shell Bank
“Shell Bank” means a bank that has no physical presence in the country in which it is incorporated and
licensed, and which is unaffiliated with a regulated financial group that is subject to effective consolidated
supervision. Physical presence means meaningful mind and management located within a country. The
existence simply of a local agent or low-level staff does not constitute physical presence.
28. Simplified Due Diligence (SDD)
Any due diligence applied to establish the identity of customer, which involves measures less stringent then
basic due diligence can be termed as ‘Simplified Due Diligence’. Obtaining less information or alternate
information based on the particular type of customer & based on availability of documents and/or seeking
less robust verification, of the customer’s location identity and the purpose and intended nature of the
business relationship.
29. Suspicious transaction
“Suspicious transaction” means a “transaction” as defined above, including an attempted transaction,
whether or not made in cash, which, to a person acting in good faith:
a) Gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve proceeds of an offence specified,
regardless of the value involved; or
b) Appears to be made in circumstances of unusual or unjustified complexity; or Appears to not have
economic rationale or bona-fide purpose; or
c) Gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve financing of the activities
relating to terrorism.
Explanation: Transactions involving of the activities relating to terrorism includes transaction involving funds
suspected to be linked or related to, or to be used for terrorism, terrorist acts or by a terrorist, terrorist
organization or those who finance or are attempting to finance terrorism.
30. Transaction
“Transaction” means a purchase, sale, loan, pledge, gift, transfer, delivery or the arrangement thereof and
includes:
a) Opening of an account
b) Deposit, withdrawal, exchange or transfer of funds in whatever currency, whether in cash or by
cheque, payment order or other instruments or by electronic or other non-physical means;
c) The use of a safety deposit box or any other form of safe deposit;
d) Entering into any fiduciary relationship;
e) Any payment made or received, in whole or in part, for any contractual or other legal obligation
Establishing or creating a legal person or legal arrangement.
31. Video based Customer Identification Process (V-CIP)
“Video based Customer Identification Process (V-CIP)” is an alternate method of customer identification
with facial recognition and customer due diligence by an authorized official of the Bank by undertaking
seamless, secure, live, informed-consent based audio-visual interaction with the customer to obtain
identification information required for CDD purpose to ascertain the veracity of the information furnished
by the customer through independent verification and maintaining audit trail of the process. Such processes
complying with prescribed standards and procedures shall be treated on par with face to face CIP for the
purpose of this Master Direction.
32. Walk-in Customer
“Walk-in customer” means a person who does not have an account based relationship with the bank, but
undertakes transaction with the bank.
33. Wire Transfer related definitions
a) Batch Transfer
Batch transfer is a transfer comprised of a number of individual wire transfers that are being sent to the
same financial institutions but may/may not be ultimately intended for different persons
b) Beneficiary
Beneficiary refers to a natural or legal person or legal arrangement who / which is identified by the
originator as the receiver of the requested wire transfer.
c) Beneficiary bank
It refers to a financial institution, regulated by the RBI, which receives the wire transfer from the ordering
financial institution directly or through an intermediary RE and makes the funds available to the beneficiary.
d) Cover Payment
Cover Payment refers to a wire transfer that combines a payment message sent directly by the ordering
financial institution to the beneficiary financial institution with the routing of the funding instruction (the
cover) from the ordering financial institution to the beneficiary financial institution through one or more
intermediary financial institutions.
e) Cross-border wire transfer
Cross-border wire transfer refers to any wire transfer where the ordering financial institution and beneficiary
financial institution are located in different countries. This term also refers to any chain of wire transfer in
which at least one of the financial institutions involved is located in a different country.
f) Domestic wire transfer
Domestic wire transfer refers to any wire transfer where the ordering financial institution and beneficiary
financial institution are located in India. This term, therefore, refers to any chain of wire transfer that takes
place entirely within the borders of India, even though the system used to transfer the payment message
may be located in another country.
g) Financial Institution
In the context of wire-transfer instructions, the term ‘Financial Institution’ shall have the same meaning as has
been ascribed to it in the FATF Recommendations, as revised from time to time.
h) Intermediary bank
Intermediary bank refers to a financial institution or any other entity, regulated by the RBI which handles an
intermediary element of the wire transfer, in a serial or cover payment chain and that receives and transmits a
wire transfer on behalf of the ordering financial institution and the beneficiary financial institution, or
another intermediary financial institution.
i) Ordering bank
Ordering bank refers to the financial institution, regulated by the RBI, which initiates the wire transfer and
transfers the funds upon receiving the request for a wire transfer on behalf of the originator
j) Originator
Originator refers to the account holder who allows the wire transfer from that account, or where there is no
account, the natural or legal person that places the order with the ordering financial institution to perform
the wire transfer.
k) Serial Payment
Serial Payment refers to a direct sequential chain of payment where the wire transfer and accompanying
payment message travel together from the ordering financial institution to the beneficiary financial
institution directly or through one or more intermediary financial institutions (e.g., correspondent banks).
l) Straight-through processing
Straight-through processing refers to payment transactions that are conducted electronically without the
need for manual intervention.
m) Unique transaction reference number
Unique transaction reference number refers to a combination of letters, numbers or symbols, determined by
the payment service provider, in accordance with the protocols of the payment and settlement system or
messaging system used for the wire transfer.
n) Wire transfer
Wire transfer refers to any transaction carried out on behalf of an originator through a financial institution
by electronic means with a view to making an amount of funds available to a beneficiary at a beneficiary
financial institution, irrespective of whether the originator and the beneficiary are the same person.
5. Key Elements of the policy
KYC policy of the bank has following four key elements:
a. Customer Acceptance Policy,
b. Risk Management
c. Customer Identification Procedures and
d. Monitoring of Transactions.
Customer Acceptance Policy (CAP)
Bank shall develop clear Customer Acceptance Policies and procedures, including a description of the types
of customers that are likely to pose a higher than average risk to the bank and including the following
aspects of customer relationship in the Bank are:
i. No account is opened or maintained in anonymous or fictitious / benami name.
ii. While opening an account and during the periodic updation, documents and other information to
be collected from different categories of customers are detailed in ANNEXURE - II of this policy.
iii. Bank will not open an account where the bank is unable to apply appropriate customer due
diligence measures i.e. bank is unable to verify the identity and / or obtain required documents either due
to non-cooperation of the customer or non-reliability of the documents / information furnished by the
customer. Bank may also consider closing an existing account under similar circumstances.
iv. Additional information, where such information requirement has not been specified in the
internal KYC Policy of the bank, is obtained with the explicit consent of the customer .
v. No transaction or account-based relationship is undertaken without following the CDD procedure.
vi. Circumstances, in which a customer is permitted to act on behalf of another person / entity, shall
be clearly spelt out in conformity with the established law and practice of banking. Bank shall have suitable
systems in place to ensure that the identity of the customer does not match with any person or entity,
whose name appears in the sanction lists circulated by the Reserve Bank.
vii. Bank shall apply the CDD procedure at the UCIC (Unique Customer Identification Code) level. Thus if
an existing KYC compliant customer desires to open another account with our bank, there shall be no need
for a fresh CDD exercise.
viii. While opening joint account, CDD Procedure is followed for all the joint account holders.
ix. Through digital signature branch shall verify an equivalent e-document which is obtained from the
customer as explained in 4.13 in this policy.
x. Where Permanent Account Number (PAN) is obtained, the same shall be verified from the
verification facility of the issuing authority.
xi. Where Goods and Services Tax (GST) details are available, the GST number shall be verified
from the search/verification facility of the issuing authority
Where bank forms a suspicion of money laundering or terrorist financing, and it reasonably believes
that performing the CDD process will tip-off the customer, it shall not pursue the CDD process, and
instead file an STR with FIU-IND.
Adoption of customer acceptance policy and its implementation shall not become too restrictive, which
result in denial of banking facility to the members of the general public, especially to those, who are
financially or socially disadvantaged.
5.1.1 Unique Customer Identification number (UCIC)
The increasing complexity and volume of financial transactions necessitate that customers do not have
multiple identities within a bank, across the banking system and across the financial system. UCIC helps the
bank to identify customers, track the facilities availed, monitor financial transactions in a holistic manner and
to have a better approach to risk profiling of customers.
In our Bank, CIF of the customer is the Unique Number for that customer, and it serves the purpose of
Unique Customer Identification Code (UCIC).
Before creating a new CIF for any customer for opening any new account, branch should first verify that
the same customer has not an existing CIF in the CBS system. If a customer has already been allotted a CIF,
the new account(s) of that customer must be opened under the existing CIF only. No additional CIF should
be created for him/her. For finding out the existing CIFs of all existing customers, “CIF Search” utility is
provided under Intranet (ULC) to the branches, which must be used before opening any new account for any
customer.
Utility for knowing the customers already having multiple CIFs in the system is also provided to the
branches. Branches should check up the reports provided under this utility on daily basis and undertake the
exercise of keeping only one CIF for one customer by linking of additional CIFs created in the system for the
same customer to a single CIF and deactivating all other CIFs.
A Unique Customer Identification Code (UCIC) will help the Bank to identify customers, track the facilities
availed, monitor financial transactions in a holistic manner and enable the Bank to have a better approach to
risk profiling of customers. Branches are required to strictly avoid creating multiple customer IDs while
opening new accounts and in case of existing multiple IDs, branches have to carry out the process of de-
duplication.
The bank shall not issue UCIC to all walk-in / occasional customers such as buyers of prepaid instruments /
purchasers of third-party products. However, UCIC shall be allotted to such walk-in customers who have
frequent transactions in branch.
Customer Acceptance Policy (CAP)
The inadequacy or absence of KYC standards can subject the Bank to serious customer and counter party
risks especially reputational, operational, legal and concentration risks.
Reputational Risk
Reputational Risk is defined as “the potential that adverse publicity regarding the Bank’s business practices
and associations, whether accurate or not, will cause a loss of confidence in the integrity of the
institution”.
Operational Risk
It can be defined as “the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes,
people and systems or from external events.”
Legal Risk
Legal Risk is “the possibility that lawsuits, adverse judgments or contracts that turn out to be unenforceable
can disrupt or adversely affect the operations or condition of the Bank”.
Concentration Risk
Concentration risk although mostly applicable on the assets side of the balance sheet, may affect the
liabilities side as it is also closely associated with funding risk, particularly the risk of early and sudden
withdrawal of funds by large depositors, with potentially damaging consequences for the Bank’s liquidity.
Risk perception in respect of customer
It is worth noting that all these risks are interrelated. Any one of them can result in significant financial cost
to the Bank as well as the need to divert considerable management time and energy to resolve problems
that arise. Customers frequently have multiple accounts with the Bank, but in offices located at different
places. To effectively manage the reputational, operational and legal risk arising from such accounts, Bank shall
aggregate and monitor significant balances and activity in these accounts on a fully consolidated basis,
whether the accounts are held as on balance sheet, off balance sheet or as assets under management or on a
fiduciary basis.
Branches should exercise ongoing due diligence with respect to the business relationship with every customer
and closely examine the transactions in order to ensure that they are consistent with their knowledge about
the clients, their business and risk profile and where necessary, the source of funds. The Board of Directors
of the Bank shall ensure that an effective KYC/AML/CFT programme is put in place by establishing
appropriate procedures and ensuring their effective implementation. It shall cover proper management
oversight, systems and controls, segregation of duties, training of staff and other related matters. In
addition, the following also to be ensured for effectively implementing the AML/CFT requirements:
i. Using a risk-based approach to address management and mitigation of various AML/CFT risks.
ii. Allocation of responsibility for effective implementation of policies and procedures.
iii. Independent evaluation by the compliance functions of Bank’s policies and procedures, including
legal and regulatory requirements.
iv. Concurrent/internal audit/snap audit to verify the compliance with KYC/AML policies and
procedures.
v. Putting up consolidated note on such audits and compliance to the Audit Committee Board (ACB) at
quarterly intervals and to Board of Directors as and when specified by Inspection & Audit Department.
Branches shall prepare a profile for each new customer based on risk categorization. The customer profile
may contain information relating to customer's identity, social/financial status, nature of business activity,
information about his clients' business and their location etc. The nature and extent of due diligence will
depend on the risk perceived by the Bank. Branches shall categorise the customers into low, medium and
high risk category based on the assessment and risk perception of the customers, identifying transactions
that fall outside the regular pattern of activity and not merely based on any group or class they belong to.
The Bank shall have a Board approved policy for risk categorisation and ensure that the same is meticulously
complied with, to effectively help in combating money laundering activities. The nature and extent of due
diligence, shall be based on the following principles:
i. Individuals (other than High Net Worth) and entities, whose identity and source of income, can be
easily identified, and customers in whose accounts the transactions conform to the known profile, shall be
categorised as low risk. Illustrative examples include salaried employees and pensioners, people belonging
to lower economic strata, government departments and government owned companies, regulators and
statutory bodies, etc.
ii. Customers who are likely to pose a higher than average risk shall be categorized as medium or high
risk depending on the background, nature and location of activity, country of origin, sources of funds,
customer profile, etc. Customers requiring very high level of monitoring, e.g., those involved in cash
intensive business, Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) of foreign origin, shall be categorised as high risk.
iii. Whenever there are suspicions of money laundering or financing of activities relating to
terrorism or where there are doubts about the veracity of previously obtained customer identification data,
branches should review the due diligence measures including verifying again the identity of the customer and
obtaining information on the purpose and intended nature of business relationship.
iv. Bank has adopted a risk categorization model as advised by the Indian Banks Association.
‘Customer risk’ in the present context refers to the money laundering and terrorist funding risk associated
with a particular customer from a bank’s perspective. This risk is based on risk perceptions associated with
customer profile and level of risk associated with the product and channels used by the customer.
Customer Risk categorisation
For effective implementation of KYC, anti-money laundering (AML) and combating of financing of terrorism
(CFT) measures, Risk categorizing a customer as Low Risk, Medium Risk and High Risk.
Risk categorisation shall be undertaken based on parameters such as customer’s identity, social/financial
status, nature of business activity, and information about the customer’s business and their location,
geographical risk covering customers as well as transactions, type of products/services offered,
delivery channel used for delivery of products/services, types of transaction undertaken – cash,
cheque/monetary instruments, wire transfers, forex transactions, etc. While considering customer’s identity,
the ability to confirm identity documents through online or other services offered by issuing authorities may
also be factored in. The risk categorisation of a customer and the specific reasons for such categorisation
shall be kept confidential and shall not be revealed to the customer to avoid tipping off the customer
i. Low Risk Customers
Individuals (other than High Net worth) and entities whose identities and sources of income can be easily
identified and transactions in whose accounts by and large conform to the known profile may be categorised
as Low Risk customers, such as:
- Salaried employees
- People belonging to lower economic strata of the society
- Government Departments
- Government owned companies
- Regulatory and Statutory bodies, etc.
For the above category, the KYC requirements of proper identification and verification of proof of address
would suffice.
Updating KYC of Low-Risk Customers: Every 10 years.
ii. Medium Risk Customers
Customers who are likely to pose a higher than average risk to the Bank should be categorized as medium
or high risk.
For this category, higher due diligence is required which includes customer‘s background, nature and
location of activity, country of origin, source of funds and his/her customer profile, etc. besides proper
identification.
An indicative list Medium Risk Customers is as under:
- Gas Dealers
- Car / boat / plane dealers
- Electronics (wholesale)
- Travel agency,
- Telemarketers,
- Telecommunication service providers
- Pawnshops,
- Auctioneers,
- Restaurants, Retail shops, Movie theatres etc.
- Sole practitioners
- Notaries
- Accountants
- Purdanashin
Updating KYC of Medium-Risk Customers: Every 8 years.
iii. High Risk Customers
For this category, higher due diligence is required which includes customer’s background, nature and
location of activity, country of origin, source of funds and his customer profile, etc. besides proper
identification. Bank shall subject such accounts to enhanced monitoring on an ongoing basis.
- Trusts, charities, NGOs and organizations receiving donations.
- Companies having close family shareholding or beneficial ownership
- Firms with ‘sleeping partners’.
- Accounts under Foreign Contribution Regulation Act.
- Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs).
- Customers who are close relatives of PEPs and accounts of which a PEP is the ultimate
beneficial owner.
- Those with dubious reputation as per public information available.
- Accounts of non-face-to-face customers.
- High Net worth Individuals*
- Non-Resident customers.
- Accounts of Cash intensive businesses such as accounts of bullion dealers (including sub-
dealers) & jewelers.
Updating KYC of High-Risk Customers: Every 2 years.
iv. Parameters defining High Net worth Individuals (HNIs)
Customers with any of the following shall be treated as High Net worth Individuals;
- Average balance exceeding Rs. 25 lakhs in SB.
- Average Balance exceeding Rs. 50 lakhs in CA.
- Term deposits exceeding Rs. 50 lakhs in aggregate.
- Annual turnover exceeding Rs. 25 lakhs in the SB account, and exceeding Rs. 100 lakhs in
the CA account.
- VIPs such as head of Village / Town / City, Top Executives of Companies etc.
For arriving at average balance in Savings and Current account, average balance during the immediately
preceding last half financial year shall be considered.
For term deposits, aggregate term deposits of the customer at any point of time during the current f inancial
year shall be considered.
Parameters for defining High Net worth Individuals Customers with any of the following:
- Average balance of Rs. 100 lakhs and above in all deposit accounts (SB+CA+TD).
- Enjoying Fund based limits/term loans exceeding Rs. 100 lakhs
The categorization of customers under risk perception is only illustrative and not exhaustive. The branches
may categorize the customers according to the risk perceived by them while taking into Branches shall
prepare a Risk profile of each customer and apply enhanced due diligence measures on High Risk customers.
IBA has provided in indicative list of High / Medium Risk products, Services, Geographies, Locations, etc., for
Risk Based Transactions Monitoring by Banks.
As per IBA Working Group guidelines, Bank may choose to carry out either manual classification or automatic
classification or a combination of both. Similarly, for selecting parameters, Bank may select the parameters
based on the available data. Once the parameters are finalized, Bank may choose the appropriate risk rating
/ scoring models by giving due weightage to each parameter.
Bank has adopted combination of manual and automatic classification. Based on the availability of data,
bank shall finalize parameters which are available in the system and the same shall be reviewed half yearly
basis. System shall assign provisional risk categorization based on the system provided parameters.
Branches shall review the same and make suitable modification/revision, if need be, based on remaining
indicators as covered in the policy.
Branches shall prepare a profile for all customers based on Risk categorizations. The customer profile may
contain information relating to Customer’s identity, social / financial status, nature of business activity,
information about his clients business and their location etc. the nature and extent of due diligence will
depend on the risk perceived by the bank. Risk categorization shall be done based on selected parameters
and assigning suitable risk category.
Risk Parameters
The first step in process of risk categorization is selection of parameters, which would determine customer
risk. IBA Core Group on KYC and AML in its guidance note for Banks on KYC/AML/CFT obligation of Banks
under PMLA 2002 has suggested following indicative parameters which can be used, to determine the
profile and risk category of Customers:
i. Customer Constitution: Individual, Proprietorship, Partnership, Private Ltd. etc.
ii. Business Segment: Retail, Corporate etc.
iii. Country of residence / Nationality: Whether India or any overseas location / Indian or foreign
national.
iv. Product Subscription: Salary account, NRI products etc.
v. Economic Profile: HNI, Public Ltd. Company etc.
vi. Account Status: Active, inoperative, dormant.
vii. Account Vintage: Less than six months old etc.
viii. Presence in regulatory negative / PEP / Defaulters / Fraudster lists.
ix. Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) filed for the customer.
x. AML alerts.
Other parameters like source of funds, occupation, purpose of account opening, nature of business, mode of
operation, credit rating etc. can also be used in addition of the above parameters. Bank shall adopt all or
majority of these parameters based on availability of data.
Periodical review of risk categorization of customers shall be undertaken once in every six months. Such
review for the first half of the financial year i.e. April to September shall be undertaken in succeeding
November and for second half of the financial year i.e. October to March in succeeding May in every
Financial Year.
Risk Rating of customer
Bank shall ensure to classify Customers as Low Risk, Medium Risk and High Risk depending on background,
nature and location of activity, country of origin, sources of funds and customer profile etc.
A. An illustrative list of Low / Medium / High Risk Customers, Products, Services, Geographies, etc.,
based on recommendations of IBA Working Group on Risk Based Transactions Monitoring (detailed in
Annexure III of this policy).
B. Risk rating based on the Deposits/account balance:
Account Types High Medium Low
All deposit accounts Rs. 50 lakh & Rs. 10 lakh & above but less Less than Rs. 10 lakh
above than Rs. 50 lakh
(SB+ CA+ TD)
Above categorization of the Customer shall be based on all accounts linked to Customer Information File (CIF)
irrespective of constitution of account like Joint account, Partnership account etc. However, accounts linked
to (CIF) where customers do not have any stake in Business / activity need not be clubbed for the above
purpose.
C. Risk Categorization of the customers shall be done according to the risk perceived while taking into
account the above aspects. For instance, a salaried class individual who is generally to be classified under
low risk category may be classified otherwise based on following illustrative list of parameters considered as
"High Risk" such as:
- Unusual transaction / behaviour.
- Submitted Suspicious Transaction Reports (STR) for Customer.
- Submitted Cash Transaction Report (CTR).
- Frequent Cheque returns.
- Minor
D. Risk categorization of customers shall be based on combination of above parameters, i.e.,
mentioned under A, B & C above. Among the chosen parameters, highest risk grade will be assigned as
overall Risk for the customer.
Example: a Travel Agent (Medium risk) with Proprietorship account (Medium risk) and having Savings
account with average balance of Rs. 1,50,000/- (Medium risk) and Term Deposit of Rs. 4,00,000/- (Low risk),
shall be assigned with overall rating of "Medium Risk", provided all other conditions mentioned under C
above does not necessitate for assigning "High Risk".
Customer Due Diligence (CDD) for Virtual Currencies (VCs)
Branches need to remain vigilant and ensure enhanced due diligence are in place while dealing with such
entities and their customers. Full Compliance of PML Act/Rules and the Master Direction on KYC should be
ensured for any such relationship.
Banks to ensure following while transactions with entities dealing with VCs entities.
I. All Customers dealing in VCs should be categorized as High Risk
II. Ensuring highest degree of vigilance while undertaking such transactions
III. Ensuring enhanced due diligence while dealing with entities /customers engaged in VCs
IV. Identification of Beneficial Owner (BOs) where ever applicable.
Risk categorisation of customers undertaken by the bank
Based on the policy / guidance / notifications of RBI / IBA and also the methodology of Customer Risk
Categorization (as detailed under points A, B & C above), risk rating has been assigned taking into account
the following parameters available in CBS system:
i. Customer type
ii. Customer constitution.
iii. Type of business.
iv. Product code.
v. Account status
vi. Account vintage
vii. Average balance in deposits in SB / Current / Term Deposit accounts.
All customer profiles / accounts of NRIs, HNIs, PEPs, NGOs, Trusts, Co-operative Societies, HUF, Exporters,
Importers and Accounts having Beneficial Owners shall be invariably categorized as High Risk, irrespective of
the lower risk category (low / medium) allotted under other parameters in the Matrix like customer
profession, type of business, product code, account status, account vintage and balance in the account.
As per RBI directions, the parameters used for categorizing the risk profile of customers should include
those named in complaints (from legal enforcement authorities) / frauds. As the system will not identify the
customers / accounts named in complaints (from legal enforcement authorities) / frauds, this parameter has
not been included in the Risk
Categorization Matrix: Branches are advised to categories such customers / accounts under “High Risk”
category as and when complaints (from legal enforcement authorities) are received or fraud is reported
against the customer / account holder.
Blocked Accounts and Unclaimed deposits shall be categorized as High Risk. As per RBI directions, Blocked
account status should be part of the initial categorization of an account at the branch level rather than being
part of the review of risk categorization at the central level. Hence, branches are advised to categories such
accounts as High Risk at the time of blocking the account.
Accounts of dealers in Jewellery, Gold / Silver / Bullions, Diamonds and other precious metals / Stones shall
be categorized under “High Risk”.
Under vintage parameter, newly opened CASA accounts which have not completed 6 months shall be
categorized as High Risk, except accounts pertaining to staff, ex-staff, pensioners, small accounts, Financial
Inclusion and Basic Savings Bank Accounts. However, if the accounts under the above categories are rated as
High / Medium risk under any of the other 6 parameters under the risk categorization matrix, such accounts
are to be categorized basing on the highest risk category allotted under those parameters.
Once new account completes six months then the account should be categorized as medium subject to
complying with other parameters. Account thereafter should go to low risk after twelve months subject to
complying with other parameters.
Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment by Bank:
(a) IRM Department HO shall carry out ‘Money Laundering (ML) and Terrorist Financing (TF) Risk
Assessment’ exercise periodically to identify, assess and take effective measures to mitigate its money
laundering and terrorist financing risk for clients, countries or geographic areas, products, services,
transactions or delivery channels, etc.
The assessment process should consider all the relevant risk factors before determining the level of overall
risk and the appropriate level and type of mitigation to be applied. While preparing the internal risk
assessment, IRM Department, HO shall take cognizance of the overall sector-specific vulnerabilities, if any,
that the regulator/supervisor may share with Bank from time to time.
(b) The risk assessment shall be properly documented and be proportionate to the nature, size,
geographical presence, complexity of activities/structure, etc. of the Bank. Further, the periodicity of risk
assessment exercise shall be determined by the Board, in alignment with the outcome of the risk
assessment exercise. However, it should be reviewed at least annually.
(c) The outcome of the exercise shall be put up to the Risk Management Committee of the Board, and
should be available to competent authorities and self-regulating bodies.
(d) Bank shall apply a Risk Based Approach (RBA) for mitigation and management of the identified risk
and should have Board approved policies, controls and procedures in this regard. Further, Bank shall monitor
the implementation of the controls and enhance them if necessary. IRM Department HO shall issue separate
guidelines & SOP in this regard.
Roles & Responsibilities (Compliance of the Policy)
i. Designated Director
Bank has nominated the Executive Director as a Designated Director of the Bank, as required, to ensure
overall compliance with the obligations under the Act and Rules. The Designated Director shall oversee the
compliance position of AML norms in the Bank.
The name, designation and address of the Designated Director shall be communicated to the FIU-IND as well
as RBI.
ii. Principal Officer
Bank has appointed General Manager, Inspection and Audit, Head Office as Principal Officer. The Principal
Officer shall be independent and report directly to the senior management or to the Board of Directors.
Principal Officer is responsible for monitoring AML compliance at operational units, escalation of suspicious
transactions reported by branches through STRs and sharing of information as required under the law. He
will maintain close liaison with enforcement agencies, banks and any other institution which are involved in
the fight against money laundering and combating financing of terrorism.
The role and responsibilities of the Principal Officer include overseeing and ensuring overall compliance with
regulatory guidelines on AML/CFT issued from time to time and obligations under the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002, rules and regulations made there under, as amended from time to time.
The Principal Officer is responsible for timely submission of STR, CTR, CBWTR and reporting of counterfeit
notes (CCR) and all transactions involving receipts by Non-Profit Organizations (NTR) of value more than
Rupees Ten lakh or its equivalent in foreign currency to FIU-IND.
The Principal Officer and other appropriate staff shall have timely access to customer identification data and
other CDD information, transaction records and other relevant information.
The Principal Officer shall be the competent authority for fixing the thresholds for generation of AML alerts
and the periodicity of reviewing the alerts shall be once in a year or as and when required.
The name, designation and address of the Principal Officer shall be communicated to FIU-IND as well as RBI.
In no case, the Principal Officer shall be nominated as the 'Designated Director'.
iii. Chief Operating Officer
a. Chief Operating Officer shall be head of Operation department and shall be responsible for
monitoring KYC/ CKYC / R-KYC / V-KYC compliance at operational units, The role and responsibilities of the
Chief Operating Officer include overseeing and ensuring overall compliance with regulatory guidelines on
KYC/ CKYC / R-KYC / V-KYC issued from time to time and, rules and regulations made there under, as
amended from time to time
b. Operation Department shall identify the parameters available in the system for risk categorization
through the system as per the model suggested in the policy.
c. Operation Department shall review fixing of parameters available through the system half yearly
from PMO Department.
d. Operation Department will review on risk categorization of all CIFs and accordingly generate the alerts
through CBS for periodic updation of KYC (Re-KYC) to eligible customers and monitoring of the same in
liaison with IT Department.
e. Operation department shall submit quarterly report to the Board/ ACB.
f. Operation department shall ensure the compliance of directions given by the Audit Committee of
the Board.
g. Bank shall ensure that decision-making functions of determining compliance with KYC norms are
not outsourced.
h. Operation Department shall follow up with the Zones & branches for identification & updation of
Beneficial Owner (BO) in all eligible Legal Entity accounts.
iv. Planning Department:
Issuance of guidelines pertaining to KYC/AML/CFT for Domestic deposits for all deposit products through
deposit policy and implementation / monitoring of the same in liaison with IT Department.
v. Operations Department:
Issuance of guidelines pertaining to KYC/ CKYC / R-KYC / V-KYC and implementation thereon for all existing
and new accounts and monitoring of the same in liaison with IT Department.
Operations Department shall review and provide necessary recommendations / directions to strengthen
adherence of KYC/AML guidelines
vi. TIBD:
Issuance of guidelines pertaining to KYC/AML/CFT for Overseas deposits and implementation /
monitoring of the same in liaison with IT Department.
vii. PMO, IT Department, H.O
a. IT Department shall identify the parameters available in the system for risk categorization through
the system as per the model suggested in the policy in liaison with Operation Department
b. PMO Shall review fixing of parameters available through the system half yearly.
c. PMO Shall conduct risk categorizations of all CIFs in our CBS for the first half of the financial year i.e.
April to September shall be undertaken in succeeding November and for second half of the financial year i.e.
October to March in succeeding May in every Financial Year in liaison with Operation Department.
d. IT may also apply additional alert indicators to address specific risks faced and informed by AML Cell.
e. Add Update the UAPA List SDN List as and when provided by the AML list and real time screening
with list before and applying stop, override in all matching cases.
viii. AML cell, Inspection & Audit Department H.O.
Verification of implementation of AML/CFT guidelines including liaison with RBI/IBA/FIU/other agencies,
reporting to regulatory authorities and RBI apart from attending to STR, CTR, NTR and CCR alerts.
The AML cell take steps to identify and assess the Money Laundering / Terrorism Financing risk for
customers, as also for products / services / transactions / delivery channels. Bank shall have controls and
procedures in place to effectively manage and mitigate the risk adopting a risk-based approach. As a
corollary, AML cell adopt enhanced measures for products, services and customers with a medium or high-
risk rating.
a. Shall assess periodical AML/CFT and reporting to Top-Management / Board.
b. HO AML cell is responsible for scrutiny / closure of STR alerts and submission of CTR / NTR / CBWTR
/ CCR / STR to FIU-IND. Post-Closure scrutiny of closed alerts @5 % shall be undertaken by
officials in cadre SMG-IV or above,
c. AML cell is also responsible for attending queries raised by FIU-IND, Enforcement Directorate, and
other Law Enforcement Agencies, and reporting to Top-Management / Board,
d. AML Cell shall attend correspondent banking questionnaires in liaison with TIBD after duly vetted by
Chief Compliance Officer of the Bank.
ix. Roles and responsibilities of Inspection & Audit Department, HO
a. Shall specifically check and verify the application of KYC procedures at the branches and comment
on the lapses observed in this regard.
b. Concurrent / internal audit system to verify the compliance with KYC / AML policies and
procedures and submit quarterly audit notes and compliance to the Audit Committee. At the end of
every calendar quarter, implementation and compliance of concurrent audit reports on adherence to
KYC-AML guidelines at branches would be reviewed for apprising Audit Committee of Board.
x. Roles and responsibilities of Branches
a. Wherever there is suspicion at branch level that customer is above low risk, branches should carry
out customer due diligence (CDD).
b. Functionality for raising suspicious transactions at branch level has been provided in ULC dropdown
under the name of AML Offline Scenarios, where branches can raise suspicion on selection of relevant RFIs
(Red Flag Indicators) and uploading KYC documents & AOF.
c. Suspicious transactions based on adverse media reports & Law Enforcement Agency enquires,
public complaints, behavioral scenarios, attempted transactions etc. Shall be escalated to Centralized AML
Cell through AML offline Scenarios Module /email.
d. While monitoring of transactions, branches shall arrive at a conclusion whether the transaction is
suspicious or not, based on objective parameters for enhanced due diligence. Some of the objective
parameters for enhanced due diligence should be:
- Customer locations
- Financial status
- Nature of business
- Purpose of transaction.
e. Branches are responsible for ensuring compliances of KYC/AML/CFT guidelines in letter and spirit.
f. Branch shall ensure to identify beneficial owner in Legal Entity Accounts & update the same in CBS
System for all new as well as existing legal entity accounts.
g. Branch Manager shall be responsible for monitoring KYC / AML / CFT/ CKYC / Re-KYC compliance at
operational units, including overseeing and ensuring overall compliance with regulatory guidelines on KYC /
AML / CFT / CKYC / R-KYC in the Branch , abiding by the policy guidelines and govt rules and regulations , as
amended from time to time .
h. Branch shall ensure to complete CKYC and Re-KYC in all eligible accounts.
It shall be the duty of every bank branch, its Designated Director, officers and employees to observe the
procedure and manner of furnishing and reporting information on transactions.
Monitoring / Review of Customer Risk Categorization (CRC)
Please refer Annexure IV for Monitoring / Review of Customer Risk Categorization (CRC) in detail.
Customer Identification Procedure (CIP)
Customer identification means undertaking CDD (Customer Due Diligence i.e. identifying and verifying the
customer and the beneficial owner).
a. Bank shall obtain sufficient information necessary to establish, to its satisfaction, the identity of each
new customer, whether regular or occasional and the purpose of the intended nature of banking
relationship. The Bank shall observe due diligence based on the risk profile of the customer in compliance
with the extant guidelines in place. Besides risk perception, the nature of information / documents required
would also depend on the type of customer (individual, corporate, etc.).
b. Bank shall clearly spells out the Customer Identification Procedure to be carried out at different
stages, i.e.
i. While establishing a banking relationship;
ii. While carrying out a financial transaction;
iii. Carrying out any international money transfer operation operations for a person who is not an
account holder of the bank.
iv. When the Bank has a doubt about the authenticity or adequacy of the customer identification
data it has obtained;
v. When bank sells third party products as agent;
vi. While selling Bank‘s own products, payment of dues of credit cards / sale and reloading of prepaid /
travel cards and any other product for more than Rs. 50,000/-.
vii. When carrying out transactions for a non-account based customer, that is a walk-in customer,
where the amount is equal to or exceeds Rs. 50,000/- whether conducted as a single transaction or
several transactions that appear to be connected;
viii. When the Bank has reason to believe that a customer (account based or walk-in) is intentionally
structuring a transaction into a series of transactions below the threshold of Rs. 50,000/-.
ix. Bank shall ensure that introduction is not to be sought while opening accounts.
‘Mandatory’ information required for KYC purpose which the customer is obliged to give while
opening an account should be obtained at the time of opening the account / during periodic updation.
Customer Due Diligence requirements (CDD) while opening accounts
CDD Procedure and sharing KYC information with Central KYC Records Registry (CKYCR) : Branches shall
capture the KYC information for sharing with the CKYCR in the manner mentioned in the Rules, as required by
the revised KYC templates prepared for ‘individual and Legal Entities’ as the case may be. Government of India
has authorized the Central Registry of Securitization Asset Reconstruction and Security Interest of India
(CERSAI), to act as, and to perform the functions of the CKYCR vide Gazette Notification dated November 26,
2015.
While establishing an account based relationship with individual customer, the branch official to as certain
as to whether the customer is already having a Customer ID with the Bank. In case the customer has an
existing Customer ID, fresh Customer ID shall not be created and the new account shall be opened with the
existing Customer ID. The name, father’s name, date of birth and address of the customer be filled in the
same manner and style as it appears in the KYC document provided by the customer. Branch official will
ensure that all the mandatory fields in Account Opening Form
/ Customer Master Form (marked as *) such as Name, Father’s name, date of birth, address , Identity Proof ,
address proof, Identification number (Identity proof document number) , Profession / activity (Nature of
Business -specific) , total annual income , total annual turnover (in case of business) etc. are completely and
correctly filled in by the customer and are also correctly captured in customer’s database in CBS. The
respective division/ offices of the Bank shall ensure that branches are capturing correct data in CBS system,
particularly in respect of Constitution Code, Profession/ Activity, Occupation, Income/ Turnover etc. as risk
category of the customer is assigned on the basis of these parameters.
E-KYC services of UIDAI
In order to reduce the risk of identity fraud, document forgery and to have paperless KYC verification, UIDAI
has launched its e-KYC service. The Reserve Bank of India has directed the banks t o accept e-KYC service as
a valid process for KYC verification under Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules,
2005.
Further, the information containing demographic details and photographs made available from UIDAI as a
result of e-KYC process (which is in an electronic form and accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent
reference) shall be treated as an Officially Valid Document under PML Rules.
i. Branches can continue to seek e-KYC based authentication of those beneficiaries who are availing
subsidies / benefits / services owing to injury, illness or infirmity on account of old age or otherwise, and
similar causes, bank shall, apart from obtaining the Aadhaar number, perform identification preferably by
carrying out offline verification or alternatively by obtaining the certified copy of any other OVD or the
equivalent e- document thereof from the customer.
ii. CDD done in this manner shall invariably be carried out by an official of the bank branch and such
exception handling shall also be a part of the concurrent audit.
Bank shall ensure to duly record the cases of exception handling in a centralized exception database. The
database shall contain the details of grounds of granting exception, customer details, name of the
designated official authorising the exception and additional details, if any. The database shall be subjected
to periodic internal audit / inspection by the bank and shall be available for supervisory review.
iii. e-KYC authentication facility can also be continued to be permitted for those customers who give a
declaration that s/he is desirous of receiving her/his entitled benefits or subsidies of welfare schemes such
as scholarship, mid-day meals, LPG subsidies, free education.
iv. For other customers, Branches can use physical copy of the Aadhaar card as well as eAadhaar,
masked Aadhaar and offline electronic Aadhaar xml provided by UIDAI, which are various forms of Aadhaar,
as Officially Valid Documents (OVD) for the KYC purpose.
(As per UIDAI circular dated 23-10-2018 based on the opinion received from the Ld. Attorney General for
India after the Aadhaar Judgment of the Hon. Supreme Court of India, delivered on 26- 09-20 18).
Explanation 1: Bank shall, where its customer submits a proof of possession of Aadhaar Number containing
Aadhaar Number, ensure that such customer redacts or blacks out his Aadhaar number through appropriate
means where the authentication of Aadhaar number is not required as per proviso (i) above.
Explanation 2: Biometric based e-KYC authentication can be done by bank official/business
correspondents/business facilitators.
Explanation 3: The use of Aadhaar, proof of possession of Aadhaar etc., shall be in accordance with the
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 and the
regulations made thereunder.
5.3.1.A Manner of voluntary use of aadhaar number
a) An Aadhaar number holder may voluntarily use the Aadhaar number in physical form, including
Aadhaar letter (or copy thereof) or printed e-Aadhaar or Aadhaar PVC Card for a lawful purpose for
establishing his identity by way of offline verification and the branch shall verify the printed details on
Aadhaar letter or printed e-Aadhaar or Aadhaar PVC card with digitally signed Aadhaar Secure QR code12.
b) An Aadhar number holder may voluntarily use the Aadhaar number in electronic form, including e-
Aadhaar or Aadhaar Paperless Offline e-KYC (XML) or m-Aadhaar for a lawful purpose for establishing his
identity by way of offline verification and the branch shall verify the digital signature.
c) An Aadhaar number holder may voluntarily use the Aadhaar number in electronic form by way of
authentication for a lawful purpose for establishing his identity by way of Yes/No or eKYC authentication
facility through an authorized requesting entity.
5.3.1.B Conditions for accepting an Aadhaar number as proof of identity
a) branches shall not accept Aadhaar number, in physical or electronic form (without authentication),
as a proof of identity for a lawful purpose, without first verifying the digital signature of the Authority as
provided in the Aadhaar secure QR Code on Aadhaar Letter or e-Aadhaar or m-Aadhaar or Aadhaar
Paperless Offline e-KYC (XML), as the case may be.
b) No branch shall accept Aadhaar number as a proof of identity of the Aadhaar number holder, in
electronic form by way of authentication, unless it is for a lawful purpose which is in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Act and only with the informed consent of the Aadhaar number holder and in a
manner as provided in the Aadhaar (Authentication and Offline Verification) Regulations, 2021.”
Introduction of accounts
Since introduction from an existing customer is not necessary for opening accounts under PML Act and
Rules or the RBI‘s extant instructions, branches shall not insist on introduction for opening of bank accounts.
After passing of PML Act and introduction of document based verification of identity
/ address of the proposed account holders, the accounts opened with proper documents are considered as
acting in good faith and without negligence by the banks.
Accounts of individuals
For undertaking Customer Due Diligence (CDD), bank shall obtain the following from an individual while
establishing an account-based relationship or while dealing with the individual who is a beneficial owner,
authorised signatory or the power of attorney holder related to any legal entity, the customer shall submit:
A. The Aadhaar number where,
i. the customer is desirous of receiving any benefit or subsidy, benefit or service for which the
expenditure is incurred from, under any scheme notified by Central Government or
State Government; or
ii. The customer decides to submit his Aadhaar number voluntarily to a bank without consultation with
the Unique Identification Authority of India; or
a. The proof of possession of Aadhaar number where offline verification can be carried out; or
b. The proof of possession of Aadhaar number where offline verification cannot be carried out then any
OVD or the equivalent e-document thereof containing the details of his identity and address;
B. The Permanent Account Number or the equivalent e-document thereof or Form No. 60 as defined in
Income-tax Rules, 1962; and
C. Such other documents in respect of the nature of business and financial status of the customer, or the
equivalent e-documents thereof as may be required by the bank.
i. Aadhaar number under clause (A) above, branch shall carry out authentication of the customer’s
Aadhaar number using e-KYC authentication facility provided by the Unique Identification Authority of India.
Further, in such case, if customer wants to provide a current address, different from the address as per the
identity information available in the Central Identities Data Repository, he may give a self-declaration to that
effect to the bank.
ii. Proof of possession of Aadhaar under clause (a) above where offline verification can be carried out,
the bank shall carry out offline verification.
iii. An equivalent e-document of any OVD, the bank shall verify the digital signature and take a live photo
as specified under Annexure I.
iv. Any OVD or proof of possession of Aadhaar number under clause (b) above where offline
verification cannot be carried out, the bank shall carry out verification through digital KYC as specified under
Annexure I.
Provided that for a period not beyond such date as may be notified by the Government for a class of
Regulated entities, instead of carrying out digital KYC, the Regulated entity pertaining to such class may
obtain a certified copy of the proof of possession of Aadhaar number or the OVD and a recent photograph
where an equivalent e- document is not submitted.
Accounts of married woman
As per the amendment to the Rules, 2005 (Gazette notification dated 22.09.2015), a document shall be
deemed to an “officially valid document” even if there is a change in the name subsequent to its issuance,
provided it is supported by a marriage certificate issued by the State Government or a Gazette notification,
indicating such a change of name.
Accordingly, Branches shall accept a copy of marriage certificate issued by the State Government or Gazette
notification indicating change in name, together with a certified copy of the ‘Officially Valid Document’ in the
existing name of the person while establishing an account based relationship or while undergoing periodic
updation exercise.
Small Accounts
It has been observed that a large number of persons, especially, those belonging to low income group both
in urban and rural areas are not able to produce Officially Valid Documents (OVDs) to satisfy the Bank
about their identity and address. This would lead to their inability to access the banking services and result
in their financial exclusion. In such cases, if a person who wants to open an account and is not able to
produce any of the OVDs or the documents applicable in respect of simplified procedure, bank shall open a
small account. The small accounts can be opened under “Maha Bank Lok Bachat Yojana”.
The small account can be opened by production of a Self-attested photograph and affixation of signature or
thumb impression, as the case may be, on the Account Opening form. The designated branch official, while
opening the small account, should certify under his signature that the person opening the account has
affixed his signature or thumb impression as the case may be, in his presence.
The features of the above account and limitations stipulated by RBI / Govt. of India are as follows:
i. accounts where aggregate of all credits in a financial year does not exceed Rs. 1.00 Lakh;
ii. The aggregate of all withdrawals and transfers in a month does not exceed Rs. 10,000/- and
iii. Where the balance at any point of time does not exceed Rs. 50,000/-.
The above limit on balance shall not be considered while making deposits through Government grants,
welfare benefits and payment against procurements.
Bank shall ensure that the stipulated monthly and annual limits on aggregate of transaction and balance
requirements in such accounts are not breached, before a transaction is allow to take place.
Any violation of the stipulations mentioned above will result in restraining the operations in the account
after giving due notice to the account holder.
The small account shall remain operational initially for a period of twelve months, and thereafter for a
further period of twelve months if the holder of such an account provides evidence before the Bank of having
applied for any of the officially valid documents within twelve months of the opening of the said account, with
the entire relaxation provisions to be reviewed in respect of the said account after twenty-four months.
Not with standing, the small account small remain operational between April 1, 2020 and June 30, 2020 and
such other periods as may be notified by the Central Government.
The small account shall be monitored and when there is suspicion of money laundering or financing of
terrorism or other high risk scenarios, the identity of customer shall be established through the production
of certified Officially Valid Documents.
Foreign remittances shall not be allowed to be credited into a small account unless the identity of the
customer is fully established through the production of officially valid documents.
Accounts of Prisoner in a Jail
In respect of the individual who is a prisoner in a jail, the signature or thumb print shall be affixed in
presence of the officer in-charge of the jail and the said officer shall certify the same under his signature
and the account shall remain operational on annual submission of certificate of proof of address issued by
the officer in-charge of the jail.
a. Such accounts are opened only at Core Banking Solution (CBS) linked branches or in a branch where it
is possible to manually monitor and ensure that foreign remittances are not credited to the account.
b. Such accounts shall be opened in small accounts product only and all the limitations stipulated by
RBI / Govt. of India shall be applied.
Branches shall ensure that the stipulated monthly and annual limits on aggregate of transactions and
balance requirements in such accounts are not breached, before a transaction is allowed to take place
Basic Savings Bank Deposit Accounts
As per RBI guidelines, the Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account shall be considered a normal banking service
available to all.
The Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account would be subject to RBI instructions on Know Your Customer (KYC)
/Anti-Money laundering (AML) for opening of bank accounts issued from time to time.
Customer Due Diligence requirement (CDD) by Third Party
For the purpose of identifying and verifying the identity of customers at the time of commencement of an
account-based relationship, the branch may rely on a third party; subject to the condition that
:
a) Records of the information of the customer due diligence carried out by the third party is obtained
within two days from the third party of from the Central KYC Records Registry.
b) The branch takes adequate steps to satisfy itself that copies of identification data and other relevant
documentation relating to the client, due diligence requirements will be made available from the third party
upon request without delay;
c) The third party is not a based in a country or jurisdiction assessed as high risk; and
d) The branch is ultimately responsible for client due diligence and undertaking enhanced due
diligence measures, as applicable.
Accounts opened using OTP based e-KYC, in non-face-to-face mode
The bank may open accounts using OTP based e-KYC, in non-face-to-face mode, are subject to the following
conditions:
i. There must be a specific consent from the customer for authentication through OTP.
ii. As a risk-mitigating measure for such accounts, bank shall ensure that transaction alerts, OTP,
etc., are sent only to the mobile number of the customer registered with Aadhaar. Bank has approved
policy delineating a robust process of due diligence for dealing with requests for change of mobile
number in such accounts. Request for change in mobile number shall only be accepted where mobile
number has been updated in aadhaar number. It must be noted that mobile number linked with aadhaar
number and for transactions alerts should be the same.
iii. The aggregate balance of all the deposit accounts of the customer shall not exceed rupees one lakh.
In case, the balance exceeds the threshold, the account shall cease to be operational, till CDD is complete.
iv. The aggregate of all credits in a financial year, in all the deposit accounts taken together, shall not
exceed rupees two lakh.
v. As regards borrowal accounts, only term loans shall be sanctioned. The aggregate amount of term
loans sanctioned shall not exceed rupees sixty thousand in a year.
vi. Accounts, both deposit and borrowal, opened using OTP based e-KYC shall not be allowed for more
than one year within which identification is to be carried out, as per para 5.3.1.
vii. If the CDD procedure as mentioned above is not completed within a year, in respect of deposit
accounts, the same shall be closed immediately. In respect of borrowal accounts no further debits shall be
allowed.
viii. A declaration shall be obtained from the customer to the effect that no other account has been
opened nor will be opened using OTP based KYC in non- face-to-face mode with any other bank. Further, while
uploading KYC information to CKYCR, the bank shall clearly indicate that such accounts are opened using
OTP based e-KYC and other banks shall not open accounts based on the KYC information of accounts opened
with OTP based e-KYC procedure in non-face-to-face mode.
ix. The bank shall have strict monitoring procedures including system to generate alerts in case of any
non-compliance / violation, to ensure compliance with the above mentioned conditions.
Video based Customer Identification Process (V-CIP)
Accounts, both deposit and borrower, opened using OTP based e-KYC shall not be allowed for more than one
year unless identification as per Section 16 or as per Section 18 (V-CIP) is carried out, If Aadhaar details are
used under Section 18, the process shall be followed in its entirety including fresh Aadhaar OTP
authentication
Bank may undertake V-CIP to carry out:
i) CDD in case of new customer on-boarding for individual customers, proprietor in case of
proprietorship firm, authorised signatories and Beneficial Owners (BOs) in case of Legal Entity (LE)
customers.
Provided that in case of CDD of a proprietorship firm, REs shall also obtain the equivalent e-document of the
activity proofs with respect to the proprietorship firm, as mentioned in Section 28 and Section 29, apart from
undertaking CDD of the proprietor.
ii) Conversion of existing accounts opened in non-face to face mode using Aadhaar OTP based e-KYC
authentication as per Section 17.
Iii) Updation/Periodic updation of KYC for eligible customers
Bank opting to undertake V-CIP, shall adhere to the following minimum standards
(a) V-CIP Infrastructure
1. The Bank should have complied with the RBI guidelines on minimum baseline cyber security and
resilience framework for banks, as updated from time to time as well as other general guidelines on IT risks.
The technology infrastructure should be housed in own premises of the RE and the V-CIP connection and
interaction shall necessarily originate from its own secured network domain. Any technology related
outsourcing for the process should be compliant with relevant RBI guidelines. Where cloud deployment
model is used, it shall be ensured that the ownership of data in such model rests with the RE only and
all the data including video recording is transferred to the RE’s exclusively owned / leased server(s)
including cloud server, if any, immediately after the V-CIP process is completed and no data shall be
retained by the cloud service provider or third-party technology provider assisting the V-CIP of the RE.
2. The Bank shall ensure end-to-end encryption of data between customer device and the hosting
point of the V-CIP application, as per appropriate encryption standards. The customer consent should be
recorded in an auditable and alteration proof manner.
3. The V-CIP infrastructure / application should be capable of preventing connection from IP addresses
outside India or from spoofed IP addresses.
4. The video recordings should contain the live GPS co-ordinates (geo-tagging) of the customer
undertaking the V-CIP and date-time stamp. The quality of the live video in the V-CIP shall be adequate to
allow identification of the customer beyond doubt.
5. The application shall have components with face liveness / spoof detection as well as face matching
technology with high degree of accuracy, even though the ultimate responsibility of any customer
identification rests with the Bank. Appropriate artificial intelligence (AI) technology can be used to ensure
that the V-CIP is robust
6. Based on experience of detected / attempted / ‘near-miss’ cases of forged identity, the technology
infrastructure including application software as well as work flows shall be regularly upgraded. Any detected
case of forged identity through V-CIP shall be reported as a cyber-security event under extant regulatory
guidelines.
7. The V-CIP infrastructure shall undergo necessary tests such as Vulnerability Assessment, Penetration
testing and a Security Audit to ensure its robustness and end-to-end encryption capabilities. Any critical gap
reported under this process shall be mitigated before rolling out its implementation. Such tests should be
conducted by empanelled auditors of Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In). Such tests
should also be carried out periodically in conformance to internal / regulatory guidelines.
8. The V-CIP application software and relevant APIs / web services shall also undergo appropriate
testing of functional, performance, and maintenance strength before being used in live environment. Only
after closure of any critical gap found during such tests, the application should be rolled out. Such tests shall
also be carried out periodically in conformity with internal/ regulatory guidelines
b) V-CIP Procedure
i) Bank shall formulate a clear work flow and standard operating procedure for V-CIP and ensure
adherence to it. The V-CIP process shall be operated only by officials of the Bank specially trained
for this purpose. The official should be capable to carry out liveliness check and detect any other
fraudulent manipulation or suspicious conduct of the customer and act upon it.
ii) Disruption of any sort including pausing of video, reconnecting calls, etc., should not result in
creation of multiple video files. If pause or disruption is not leading to the creation of multiple
files, then there is no need to initiate a fresh session by the RE. However, in case of call drop /
disconnection, fresh session shall be initiated.
iii) The sequence and/or type of questions, including those indicating the liveness of the interaction,
during video interactions shall be varied in order to establish that the interactions are real-time and
not pre-recorded.
iv) Any prompting, observed at end of customer shall lead to rejection of the account opening process.
v) The fact of the V-CIP customer being an existing or new customer, or if it relates to a case rejected
earlier or if the name appearing in some negative list should be factored in at appropriate stage of
work flow.
vi) The authorised official of the Bank performing the V-CIP shall record audio-video as well as capture
photograph of the customer present for identification and obtain the identification information
using any one of the following:
a) OTP based Aadhaar e-KYC authentication
b) Offline Verification of Aadhaar for identification
c) KYC records downloaded from CKYCR, in accordance with Section 57, using the KYC identifier
provided by the customer
d) Equivalent e-document of Officially Valid Documents (OVDs) including documents issued through
Digilocker Bank shall ensure to redact or blackout the Aadhaar number in terms of Section 16 where
the authentication of Aadhaar number is not required. In case of offline verification of Aadhaar
using XML file or Aadhaar Secure QR Code, it shall be ensured that the XML file or QR code
generation date is not older than 3 working days from the date of carrying out V-CIP.
Further, in line with the prescribed period of three days for usage of Aadhaar XML file
/ Aadhaar QR code, Bank shall ensure that the video process of the V-CIP is undertaken within three
working days of downloading / obtaining the identification information through CKYCR / Aadhaar
authentication / equivalent e-document, if in the rare cases, the entire process cannot be completed
at one go or seamlessly. However, Bank shall ensure that no incremental risk is added due to this.
VII) If the address of the customer is different from that indicated in the OVD, suitable records of the
current address shall be captured, as per the existing requirement. It shall be ensured that the
economic and financial profile/information submitted by the customer is also confirmed from the
customer undertaking the V-CIP in a suitable manner.
VIII) The authorised official of the Bank performing V-CIP shall capture a clear image of PAN card to be
displayed by the customer during the process, except in cases where e-PAN is provided by the
customer. The PAN details shall be verified from the database of the issuing authority including
through Digilocker.
IX) Use of printed copy of equivalent e-document including e-PAN is not valid for the V- CIP.
X) The authorised official of the Bank shall ensure that photograph of the customer in the Aadhaar/OVD
and PAN/e-PAN matches with the customer undertaking the V-CIP and the identification details in
Aadhaar/OVD and PAN/e-PAN shall match with the details p rovided by the customer.
XI) Assisted V-CIP shall be permissible when banks take help of Banking Correspondents (BCs)
facilitating the process only at the customer end. Banks shall maintain the details of the BC assisting
the customer, where services of BCs are utilized. The ultimate responsibility for customer due
diligence will be with the bank.
XII) All accounts opened through V-CIP shall be made operational only after being subject to concurrent
audit, to ensure the integrity of process and its acceptability of the outcome.
XIII) All matters not specified under the paragraph but required under other statutes such as the
Information Technology (IT) Act shall be appropriately complied with by the Bank.
c) V-CIP Records and Data Management.
The entire data and recordings of V-CIP shall be stored in a system / systems located in India. REs
shall ensure that the video recording is stored in a safe and secure manner and bears the date and time
stamp that affords easy historical data search. The extant instructions on record management, as stipulated
in this MD, shall also be applicable for V-CIP.
i. The activity log along with the credentials of the official performing the V-CIP shall be p reserved.
Accounts of Proprietary Concerns
For Proprietary concerns, Customer Due Diligence of the Individual (Proprietor) is to be carried out and any
two of the following documents or the equivalent e- documents there of as a proof of business / activity in
the name of the proprietary firm should be obtained:
a. Registration Certificate, including Udyam Registration Certificate (URC) issued by the
Government.
b. Certificate / license issued by the Municipal authorities under Shop & Establishment Act.
c. Sales and income tax returns.
d. CST / VAT / GST certificate.
e. Certificate / registration document issued by Sales Tax / Service Tax / Professional Tax authorities.
f. IEC (Importer Exporter Code) issued to the proprietary concern by the office of DGFT or
License/certificate of practice issued in the name of the proprietary concern by any professional body
incorporated under a statute.
g. Complete Income Tax return (not just the acknowledgement) in the name of the sole Proprietor
where the firm’s income is reflected, duly authenticated / acknowledged by the Income Tax Authorities.
h. Utility bills such as electricity, water and landline telephone bills of firm.
Though the default rule is that any two documents mentioned above should be provided as activity proof by
a Proprietary concern, in cases where the branches are satisfied that it is not possible to furnish two such
documents, they would have the discretion to accept only one of those documents as activity proof. In such
cases, the branches, however, would have to undertake contact point verification, collect such information
as would be required to establish the existence of such firm, confirm, clarify and satisfy themselves that the
business activity has been verified from the address of the proprietary concern. Photograph should be
obtained in case of NRI accounts also.
Accounts of Legal Entities (Other than Individuals)
Bank need to be vigilant against business entities being used by individuals as a 'front' for maintaining
accounts with banks. Bank shall examine the control structure of the entity, determine the source of funds
and identify the natural persons who have a controlling interest and who comprise the management. These
requirements may be moderated according to the risk perception
e.g. in the case of a public company it will not be necessary to identify all the shareholders.
A. Accounts of Companies
Where the customer is a company, certified copies of all the following documents or the equivalent e-
documents shall be obtained:
i. Certificate of incorporation
ii. Memorandum and Articles of Association
iii. Permanent Account Number of the Company
iv. A resolution from the Board of Directors and Power of Attorney granted to its managers, officers or
employees to transact on its behalf.
v. One copy of an officially Valid Document (OVD) containing details of identity and address, one
recent photograph and Permanent Account Numbers or Form 60 of related beneficial owner, the
managers, officers or employees, as the case may be, holding an attorney to transact on the company’s
behalf. Complete Due Diligence of all such individuals has to be undertaken.
vi. The names of the relevant persons holding senior management position; and Vii.The registered
office and the principal place of its business, if it is different.
B. Accounts of Partnership firms
Where the customer is a partnership firm, certified copies of all the following documents or the equivalent
e-documents shall be obtained:
ii. Partnership Deed
iii. Permanent Account Number of the Partnership Firm
iv. One copy of an officially Valid Document (OVD) containing details of identity and address, one
recent photograph and Permeant Account Numbers or Form 60 of related beneficial owner, the
managers, officers or employees, as the case may be, holding an attorney to transact on the it’s behalf;
v. The names of all the partners and address of the registered office, and the principal place of its
business, if it is different.
C. Accounts of Trusts
Where the customer is a Trust, certified copies of all the following documents or the equivalent e-
documents thereof shall be obtained:
i. Registration Certificate
ii. Trust Deed
iii. Permanent Account Number or Form 60 of the Trust
iv. One copy of an officially Valid Document (OVD) containing details of identity and address, one
recent photograph and Permanent Account Numbers or Form 60 of related beneficial owner, the managers,
officers or employees, as the case may be, holding an attorney to transact on the company’s behalf.
vi. The names of beneficiaries, trustees, settlor and authors of the trust and the address of the registered
office of the trust: and
Vii.List of trustees and documents as are required for individuals under sub-rule (4) for those discharging
role as trustee and authorized to transact on behalf of the trust.
D. Accounts of Unincorporated association or a body of individuals
Where the customer is an unincorporated association or a body of individuals, certified copies of all the
following documents or the equivalent e- documents thereof shall be obtained:
i. Resolution of the managing body of such association or body of individuals
ii. Permanent Account Number or Form 60 of the Unincorporated association or a body of individuals
iii. Power of Attorney granted to the person who will transact on its behalf.
iv. One copy of an officially Valid Document (OVD) containing details of identity and address, one
recent photograph and Permanent Account Numbers or Form 60 of related beneficial owner, the managers,
officers or employees, as the case may be, holding an attorney to transact on the company’s behalf and
v. Such information as may be required by the branch to collectively establish the legal existence of
such an association or body of individuals.
Note:
a. Unregistered trusts / partnership firms shall be included under the term ‘unincorporated
association’.
b. Term ‘body of individuals’ includes societies.
E. For opening accounts of Governments or its Departments, Societies, Universities and
Local Bodies like Village Panchayats (Juridical persons)
The certified copies of all the following documents or the equivalent e- documents shall be
obtained:
i. Document showing name of the person authorized to act on behalf of the entity;
ii. Any Officially Valid Document (OVD) which contains proof of identity and address in respect of
person holding an attorney to transact on the company’s behalf and
iii. Such documents as may be required by the Bank to establish the legal existence of such an entity/
juridical person.
H. Opening of Current Account.
For opening of current account refer RBI guidelines vide letter No.-RBI letter no.-
DOR.CRE.REC.63/21.04.048/2021-22 October 29 (Opening of Current Accounts by Banks - Need for Discipline.
I. Accounts of Non Profit Organizations
A Non Profit Organizations (NPO) means any entity or organization, constituted for religious or charitable
purposes referred to in clause (15) of section 2 of the Income-tax At, 1961 (43 of 1961), that i s registered as
a Trust or a Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or any similar State Legislation or
a company registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013). All transactions involving
receipts by these NPOs of value more than Rs. 10 Lakh or its equivalent in foreign currency is to be reported
to FIU-IND centrally from Head Office. However, if the Bank has reason to believe that a customer is
intentionally structuring a transaction into a series of transactions below the threshold of Rs. 10 lakh, the
Bank shall consider filing a Suspicious Transaction Report to FIU-IND.
Registration of NPO (Non-profit Organization) on the DARPAN Portal of NITI Aayog
Bank shall register the details of non-profit organisation on the DARPAN Portal of NITI Aayog, and shall
maintain such registration records for a period of five years after the business relationship has ended or
the account has been closed, whichever is later. Operation Department shall issue separate guidelines and
SOP in this regard.
J. Accounts operated by Power of Attorney Holders / Letter of Authority Holders
In case of accounts operated by Power of Attorney (POA) Holders / Letter of Authority (LOA)
Holders, KYC documents shall be obtained from such POA holders/ LOA holders and records shall be
maintained/ updated in the system. Where the accounts are operated by letters of authority, photographs
of the authority holders should be obtained, duly attested by the depositors.
5.3.13- Identification of Beneficial Owner (BO) in Legal Entity Accounts:
For opening an account of a Legal Person who is not a natural person, the beneficial owner(s) shall
be identified and all reasonable steps in terms of sub-rule (3) of Rule 9 of the Rules to verify his/her identity
shall be undertaken keeping in view the following:
(a) Bank is required to identify BO (Beneficial ownership) in accounts of Company, Partnership firm,
unincorporated associations and Body of Individual and update in CBS System, separate
guidelines/SOP/FAQs in this regard is already issued by the Bank.
(b) Where the customer or the owner of the controlling interest is a company listed on a stock
exchange, or it is an entity resident in jurisdictions notified by the Central government and listed on
stock exchanges in such jurisdictions, or is a subsidiary of such a company, it is not necessary to
identify and verify the identity of any shareholder or beneficial owner of such companies.
(c) In cases of trust/nominee or fiduciary accounts whether the customer is acting on behalf of another
person as trustee/nominee or any other intermediary is determined. In such cases, satisfactory
evidence of the identity of the intermediaries and of the persons on whose behalf they are acting, as
also details of the nature of the trust or other arrangements in place shall be obtained.
Quoting of PAN
Permanent account number (PAN) or equivalent e-document thereof of customers shall be obtained
and verified while undertaking transactions as per the provisions of Income Tax Rule 114B applicable to
banks, as amended from time to time. Form 60/61 shall be obtained from persons who do not have PAN or
equivalent e-document thereof.
Need for photographs and address confirmation
Passport size / stamp size photograph of the depositors shall be obtained in case of all Current
Accounts, SB accounts and Term Deposits. In case of joint accounts, partnership accounts, accounts of
societies, clubs, associations, public / private limited companies, HUF, trusts, Limited Liability Partnerships
etc., and those of minors, photographs of the authorized signatories should be obtained. Photographs of the
student account holders should be attested by the school authorities on the reverse. In case of change in the
authorized signatories, photographs of the new signatories are to be obtained duly countersigned by the
competent authorities of the concerned institutions/ organizations.
Introduction of New Technologies - Credit cards / debit cards / smart cards / gift cards etc.
Bank shall pay special attention to any money laundering threats that may arise from new or developing
technologies including internet banking that might favor anonymity, and take measures, if needed, to prevent
the same being used for money laundering/terrorist financing purposes. The Electronic Cards (debit card,
credit card, etc.) issued by the Bank to the customers may be used by them for buying goods and services,
drawing cash from ATMs and electronic transfer of funds. Branch shall ensure that appropriate KYC
procedures are duly applied before issuing the cards to the customers. Branch shall ensure full compliance
with all KYC/AML/CFT guidelines issued from time to time, in respect of add-on/ supplementary cardholders
also. Further, where marketing of these cards is done through the services of agent, the agents will also to
be subjected to due diligence and KYC measures.
Further, Bank shall ensure
(a) to undertake the ML/TF risk assessments prior to the launch or use of such products,
practices, services, technologies; and
(b) Adoption of a risk-based approach to manage and mitigate the risks through appropriate EDD
measures and transaction monitoring, etc.
Periodic Updation of KYC
Bank shall adopt a risk-based approach for periodic updation of KYC. However, periodic updation shall be
carried out at least once in every two years for high risk customers, once in every eight years for medium risk
customers and once in every ten years for low risk customers from the date of opening of the account / last
KYC Updation.
A. CDD (Customer Due Diligence) requirements for periodic updation:
i. Individual Customers:
a) No change in KYC information: In case of no change in the KYC information, a self-declaration from
the customer in this regard shall be obtained through customer’s email-id registered with the Bank,
customer’s mobile number registered with the Bank, ATMs, digital channels (such as online banking
/ internet banking, mobile application of Bank), letter etc.
b) Change in address: In case of a change only in the address details of the customer, a self-
declaration of the new address shall be obtained from the customer through customer’s email-id
registered with the Bank, customer’s mobile number registered with the Bank, ATMs, digital
channels (such as online banking / internet banking, mobile application of Bank), letter etc., and the
declared address shall be verified through positive confirmation within two months, by means such
as address verification letter, contact point verification, deliverables etc. Further, Branch shall obtain
a copy of OVD or the equivalent e-documents thereof, as defined in Section 4.9 for the purpose of
proof of address, declared by the customer at the time of periodic updation.
c) Accounts of customers who were minor at the time of opening account on their becoming major:
In case of customers for whom account was opened when they were minor, fresh photographs shall
be obtained on their becoming a major and at that time it shall be ensured that CDD documents as
per the current CDD standards are available with the Branches. Wherever required, Branches may
carry out fresh KYC of such customers i.e. customers for whom account was o pened when they were
minor, on their becoming a major.
d) Aadhaar OTP based e-KYC in non-face to face mode may be used for periodic updation. To
clarify, conditions stipulated in Section 17 are not applicable in case of updation / periodic
updation of KYC through Aadhaar OTP based e-KYC in non-face to face mode. Declaration of
current address, if the current address is different from the address in Aadhaar, shall not
require positive confirmation in this case. REs shall ensure that the mobile number for Aadhaar
authentication is same as the one available with them in the customer’s profile, in order to
prevent any fraud.
ii. Customers other than individuals:
a) No change in KYC information: In case of no change in the KYC information of the LE (Legal Entity)
customer, a self-declaration in this regard shall be obtained from the LE customer through its email id
registered with the Bank, ATMs, digital channels (such as online banking / internet banking, mobile
application of Bank), letter from an official authorized by the LE in this regard, board resolution etc.
Further, Branches shall ensure during this process that Beneficial Ownership (BO) information
available with them is accurate and shall update the same, if required, to keep it as up- to-date as
possible.
b) Change in KYC information: In case of change in KYC information, Branches shall undertake the KYC
process equivalent to that applicable for on-boarding a new LE customer.
iii. Additional measures: In addition to the above, Branches shall ensure that –
a) The KYC documents of the customer as per the current CDD standards are available with them. This is
applicable even if there is no change in customer information but the documents available with the
Branch are not as per the current CDD standards. Further, in case the validity of the CDD documents
available with the Branch has expired at the time of periodic updation of KYC, Branch shall
undertake the KYC process equivalent to that applicable for on-boarding a new customer.
b) Customer’s PAN details, if available with the Bank, is verified from the database of the issuing
authority at the time of periodic updation of KYC.
c) Fresh KYC process can be done by visiting a bank branch, or remotely through a Video based
Customer Identification Process (V-CIP)
d) An acknowledgment is provided to the customer mentioning the date of receipt of the relevant
document(s), including self-declaration from the customer, for carrying out periodic updation.
Further, it shall be ensured that the information / documents obtained from the customers at the
time of periodic updation of KYC are promptly updated in the CBS System and an intimation through
emails/messages, mentioning the date of updation of KYC details, is provided to the customer.
e) In cases where individual customers express difficulty in approaching the home branch due to age
related and other issues, such customers may approach the Branch Head of non-home Branch, who
shall obtained the necessary KYC documents along with the details as per bank format from the
customer, attest the same and immediately send to home branch for updation in CBS.
In case of Legal Entity / Corporate customers, collection of KYC details for Re-KYC and updation of
the same in CBS is to be done at Home-Branch only
Bank shall ensure to provide acknowledgement with the date of having performed KYC updation.
f) Bank shall advise the customers that in order to comply with the PML Rules, in case of any update in
the documents submitted by the customer at the time of establishment of business relationship/
account-based relationship and thereafter, as necessary; customers shall submit to the bank the
update of such documents. This shall be done within 30 days of the update to the documents for the
purpose of updating the records at Banks’ end.
B. CDD Procedures and sharing KYC information with Centralize KYC Records Registry
(CKYCR)
Government of India has authorized the Central Registry of Securitization Asset Reconstruction and
Security Interest of India (CERSAI) to act as and to perform the functions of the CKYCR vide Gazette
Notification dated November 26, 2015. Bank shall capture the KYC information for sharing the CKYCR as per
the KYC templates prepared for ‘Individuals’ and ‘Legal Entities’ (LEs), as the case may be. The templates
may be revised from time to time, as may be required and released by CERSAI.In terms of Rule 9(1A) of PML
Rules, the bank shall capture customer’s KYC records and upload onto CKYCR within 10 days of
commencement of an account-based relationship with the customer.Once identifier is generated by CKYCR,
bank shall ensure that the same is communicated to the individual / Legal Entity as the case may be. Where
a customer, for purposes of establishing an account based relationships, submits a KYC identifier to a bank,
with an explicit consent to download records from CKYCR, then such bank shall re-retrieve the KYC records
online form CKYCR using KYC identifier and the customer shall not be required to submit the same KYC
records or information or any other additional identification documents or details, unless
a. There is change in the information of the customer as existing in the records of CKYCR;
b. The current address of the customer is required to be verified;
c. In order to verify the identity and address of the customer, or to perform enhanced due diligence or
to build an appropriate risk of the client. Branches shall ensure that during periodic updation, the
customers are migrated to the current CDD standard.
In order to ensure that all KYC records are incrementally uploaded on to CKYCR, branches shall upload /
update the KYC data pertaining to accounts of individual customers and Legal Entities opened prior to
January 2017 at the time of periodic updation or earlier when the updated KYC information is obtained /
received from the customer.
Branches shall upload KYC records pertaining to accounts of Legal Entities opened on or after April 1, 2021,
on to CKYCR in terms of the provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules,
2005.
C. Temporary ceasing of operations
In case of existing customers, bank should obtain the Permanent Account Number or equivalent e-
document thereof or Form No. 60, by such date as may be notified by the Central Government, failing which
bank shall temporarily cease operations in the account till the time the Permanent Account Number or
equivalent e-document or Form No. 60 is submitted by the customer.Before temporarily ceasing operations
for an account, the bank shall give the customer an accessible notice and a reasonable opportunity to be
heard. Further, appropriate relaxation(s) for continued operation of accounts for customers who are unable
to provide Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 owing to injury, illness or infirmity on account of old
age or otherwise, and s uch like causes. Such accounts shall, however, be subject to enhanced monitoring.
If a customer having an existing account-based relationship with bank and gives in writing to the bank that
he does not want to submit his Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60, bank shall close the account
and all obligations due in relation to the account shall be appropriately settled after establishing the identity
of the customer by obtaining the identification documents as applicable to the customer.
“Temporary ceasing of operations” in relation an account shall mean the temporary suspension of all
transactions or activities in relation to that account by the bank till such time the customer complies. In case
of asset accounts such as loan accounts, for the purpose of ceasing the operation in the account, only
credits shall be allowed.
D. Freezing and Closure of accounts
It would always be open to the Bank to close the account of KYC non-compliant customers after issuing due
notice to the customer explaining the reasons for taking such a decision.
Such decisions need to be taken by the Branch Manager.
While it is absolutely necessary for banks as well as customers to comply with the measures prescribed for
KYC/AML purposes, drastic measures like closing of accounts may be taken only after sending out sufficient
discernible warning signals to the customers, basing on the level of customer education and public
awareness on the subject. In all such cases where the account holders are either not responding over a
period of time/not found at the given address, Bank may take such action as deemed necessary to comply
with KYC/AML guidelines without denying basic banking facilities.
Before taking the extreme step of closing an account on account of non-compliance with the KYC/AML
requirements, as an initial measure, branches are advised to place such accounts under close watch,
depriving the non-compliant customers certain additional facilities, till the customer complies with such
requirements.
This exercise, however, should not extend beyond a period of three months. If the customer despite such
measures, shows unwillingness to comply with KYC/AML/CFT requirements, branches would be free to
proceed further and close the accounts after giving due notice to him/her. It is reiterated that basic banking
transactions already in force should not be disturbed for meeting KYC review requirements.
In case of non-compliance of KYC requirements by the customers despite repeated reminders by branches,
branches should impose “partial freezing” on such KYC non-compliant accounts in a phased manner.
Meanwhile, the account holders can revive accounts by submitting the KYC ensure that the option of
“partial freezing” is exercised after giving due notice of three months initially to the customers to comply
with KYC requirements and followed by a reminder for further period of three months. Thereafter, branches
to impose “partial freezing” by allowing all credits and disallowing all debits, with the freedom to close the
accounts. If the accounts are still KYC non-compliant after six months of imposing initial “partial freezing”,
branches should disallow all debits and credits from/to the accounts, rendering them inoperative. Further, it
would always be open to the branches to close the account of such customers after issuing due notice to the
customer explaining the reasons for taking such a decision. Such decisions, however, need to be taken by the
Branch Manager. In the Circumstances when the Bank believes that it would no longer be satisfied about the
true identity of the account holder, the Bank shall file a Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) with Financial
Intelligence Unit India (FIU-IND) under the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, and Government of
India.
Enhanced and Simplified Due Diligence Procedure
A- Enhanced Due Diligence
Accounts of non-face-to-face customers (Other than Aadhaar OTP based on boarding):
Bank shall ensure that the first payment is to be effected through the customer's KYC complied
account with another bank, for enhanced due diligence of non-face-to-face customers.
Non-face-to-face on boarding facilitates the banks to establish relationship with the customer without
meeting the customer physically or through V-CIP. Such non-face-to-face modes for the purpose of this
Section includes use of digital channels such as CKYCR, Digi Locker, equivalent e- document, etc., and
non-digital modes such as obtaining copy of OVD certified by additional certifying authorities as
allowed for NRIs and PIOs. Following EDD measures shall be undertaken by bank for non-face-to-face
customer on boarding (other than customer on boarding in terms of Section 5.3.9)
a) In case bank has introduced the process of V-CIP, the same shall be provided as the first option to
the customer for remote on boarding. It is reiterated that processes complying with prescribed
standards and procedures for V-CIP shall be treated on par with face-to-face CIP for the purpose of
this Master Direction.
b) In order to prevent frauds, alternate mobile numbers shall not be linked post CDD with such
accounts for transaction OTP, transaction updates, etc. Transactions shall be permitted only from
the mobile number used for account opening. Bank has a robust process of due diligence for dealing
with requests for change of registered mobile number.
c) Apart from obtaining the current address proof, branch shall verify the current address through
positive confirmation before allowing operations in the account. Positive confirmation may be
carried out by means such as address verification letter, contact point verification, deliverables, etc.
d) Branch shall obtain PAN from the customer and the PAN shall be verified from the verification
e) First transaction in such accounts shall be a credit from existing KYC-complied bank account of the
customer.
f) Such customers shall be categorized as high-risk customers and accounts opened in non-face to
face mode shall be subjected to enhanced monitoring until the identity of the customer is
verified in face-to-face manner or through V-CIP.
Accounts of Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs):
Politically Exposed Persons are individuals who have been entrusted with prominent public functions by a
foreign country, including the Heads of States or Governments, senior politicians, senior government or
judicial or military officers, senior executives of state-owned corporations and important political party
officials. Bank shall gather sufficient information on any person / customer of this category intending to
establish a relationship and check all the information available on such person in the public domain. Bank
shall verify the identity of the person and seek information about the sources of funds before accepting the
PEP as a customer. Bank shall also subject such accounts to enhanced monitoring on an ongoing basis. The
above norms should also be applied to the accounts of the family members or close r elatives of PEPs.
The decision to open an account of a PEP as well as the decision to continue the business relationship in the
event of an existing customer or relatives of an existing customer subsequently becoming Politically Exposed
Person (PEP), has to be taken at Zonal Office level by Zonal Manager or Deputy Zonal Manager. In the event
of an existing customer or the beneficial owner of an existing account subsequently becoming a PEP, the
account shall be subjected to the Customer Due Diligence (CDD) measures as applicable to PEPs including
enhanced monitoring on an ongoing basis. PEPs, customers who are close relatives of PEPs and accounts
where a PEP is the ultimate beneficial owner shall be categorized as 'High Risk' so that appropriate
transaction alerts are generated, and the accounts are subjected to enhanced CDD on an ongoing basis.
Bank shall have appropriate ongoing risk management systems for identifying and applying enhanced CDD to
PEPs, customers who are close relatives of PEPs, and accounts of which a PEP is the ultimate beneficial
owner. Zonal Offices shall closely monitor PEP accounts on ongoing basis for identifying and applying
enhanced CDD to PEPs
Separate occupation code 1008 is available in CBS for classifying customer as PEP
Client accounts opened by professional intermediaries.
When the Bank has knowledge or reason to believe that the customer account opened by a professional
intermediary is on behalf of a single client, that customer shall be identified. Bank may hold 'pooled'
accounts managed by professional intermediaries on behalf of entities like mutual funds, pension funds or
other types of funds. Branches shall not open accounts of such professional intermediaries who are bound by
any customer confidentiality that prohibits disclosure of the customer details to the Bank. Where funds held
by the i ntermediaries are not co-mingled at the Bank and there are 'sub accounts', each of them attributable
to a beneficial owner, all the beneficial owners shall be identified. Where such funds are co-mingled at the
Bank, the Bank shall still look into the beneficial owners. Where the Bank rely on the 'Customer Due
Diligence' (CDD) done by an intermediary, Bank shall satisfy itself that the intermediary is a regulated and
supervised entity and has adequate systems in place to comply with the KYC requirements of the customers.
The ultimate responsibility for knowing the customer lies with the Bank.
B-Simplified Due Diligence
Simplified norms for Self Help Groups (SHGs)
In order to address the difficulties faced by Self Help Groups (SHGs) in complying with KYC norms while
opening Savings Bank accounts and credit linking of their accounts, following simplified norms shall be
followed by branches:
i. KYC verification of all the members of SHGs need not be done while opening the Savings Bank
account of the SHGs
ii. KYC verification of all the office bearers would suffice.
iii. KYC verification of all the members of SHG may be undertaken at the time of credit linking of SHGs.
iv. Customer Due Diligence (CDD) of all the members of SHG shall be undertaken at the time of credit
linking of SHGs.
Accounts of Foreign students studying in India
Considering that foreign students arriving in India are facing difficulties in complying with the Know Your
Customer (KYC) norms while opening a bank account due to non-availability of any proof of local address,
the following procedure shall be followed for opening accounts of foreign students who are not able to
provide an immediate address proof while approaching the Bank for opening bank account:-
a. Branches may open a Non-Resident Ordinary (NRO) bank account of a foreign student on the basis
of his/her passport (with visa & immigration endorsement) bearing the proof of identity and address
in the home country together with a photograph and a letter offering admission from the
educational institution in India.
b. Branches should obtain a declaration about the local address within a period of 30 days of opening
the account and verify the said local address.
c. During the 30 days period, the account should be operated with a condition of allowing foreign
remittances not exceeding USD 1000 or equivalent into the account and a cap of monthly
withdrawal to Rs. 50,000/- and pending verification of address.
d. The account would be treated as a normal NRO account after verification of address and will be
operated in terms of existing guidelines issued in the Manual of instructions on Non-Resident
Deposits and Circulars issued from time to time.
e. Students with Pakistani nationality will need prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India for opening
the account.
Simplified KYC norms for Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) for Portfolio Investment Scheme (PIS)
Simplified norms have been prescribed for those FPIs who have been duly registered in accordance
with SEBI guidelines and have undergone the required KYC due diligence / verification prescribed by SEBI
through a Custodian / Intermediary regulated by SEBI. Such eligible / registered FPIs may approach a bank
for opening a bank account for the purpose of investment under Portfolio Investment Scheme (PIS) for
which KYC documents prescribed by the Reserve Bank would be required subject to Income Tax
(FATCA/CRS). Category-I FPIs are not required to submit the undertaking that upon demand by the
Regulators/ Law Enforcement Agencies the relative document(s) would be submitted to the bank. (Please
refer Annex V)
SEBI will advise Custodians/Intermediaries regulated by them to share the relevant KYC documents with the
banks concerned based on written authorization from the FPIs. Accordingly, a set of hard copies of the
relevant KYC documents furnished by the FPIs to the Custodians/Regulated Intermediaries may be
transferred to the concerned bank through their authorized representative. While transferring such
documents, the Custodian / Regulated Intermediary shall certify that the documents have been duly verified
with the original or notarized documents have been obtained, wherever applicable. In this regard, proper
records of transfer of documents have to be maintained, both at the level of the Custodian / Regulated
Intermediary as well as at the bank, under signatures of the officials of the transfer or and transferee
entities.
While opening bank accounts for FPIs in terms of the above procedure, branches are ultimately responsible
for the customer due diligence done by the third party (i.e. the Custodian/Regulated Intermediary) and need
to take enhanced due diligence measures, as applicable, if required. Further, branches are required to obtain
undertaking from FPIs or a Global Custodian acting on behalf of the FPI to the effect that as and when
required, the exempted documents will be submitted.
In order to facilitate secondary market transactions, the branches may share the KYC documents received
from the FPI or certified copies received from a Custodian / Regulated Intermediary with other
banks/regulated market intermediaries based on written authorization from the FPI.
The above guidelines are applicable for both new and existing FPI clients. These guidelines are applicable
only for Portfolio Investment Scheme (PIS) by FPIs. In case the FPIs intend to use the bank, account opened
under the above procedure for any other approved activities (i.e. other than PIS), they would have to
undergo full KYC exercise.
Miscellaneous
A. Period for presenting payment instruments
Payment of cheques / drafts / pay orders / banker’s cheques, if they are presented beyond the
period of three months from the date of such instruments, shall not be made.
B. Collection of Account Payee Cheques
Account payee cheques for any person other than the payee constituent shall not be collected.
Banks should collect account payee cheques drawn for an amount not exceeding rupees fifty
thousand to the account of their customers who are co-operative credit societies, provided the
payees of such cheques are the constituents of such cooperative credit societies.
C. Identification and Monitoring of Money Mule Accounts
Money Mules are individuals with bank accounts who are recruited by fraudsters to receive fund
mostly through digital channels such as UPI, IMPS, Net Banking or wire transfer for the purpose of
money laundering. “Money Mules” can be used to launder the proceeds of fraud schemes (e.g.,
phishing and identity theft) by criminals who gain illegal access to deposit accounts by recruiting
third parties to act as “money mules.” In order to prevent the misuse of the banking system by the
fraudster and the money launderers through accounts of money mule, Branches should strictly
adhere to the guidelines and apply appropriate CDD while opening of accounts and monitoring of
transactions.
Any such account which has been flagged as suspected money mule accounts should immediately
be subject to enhanced due diligence and enhanced monitoring without tip-off to the customer.
Identified /suspected Money mule accounts should immediately be reported to Centralized AML
Cell for onward reporting to FIU-IND.
D. Cybercrimes /frauds through investment / part time job /Ponzi scheme scams:
Incidence of a number of cybercrimes wherein the criminals and fraudsters are resorting to different
kinds of modus operandi for perpetrating cybercrimes routed through banking channels and
payment gateways are very high.
Keeping in view the large number of cyber frauds and to prevent the misuse of the banking system
by the fraudster and money launderers, branches are required to give special emphasis on strengthening
the KYC / AML framework like adequate customer due diligence (including enhanced due diligence, wherever
required) customer risk profiling and real time transaction monitoring. Make sure that accounts in the
branches are not used as Money Mule Accounts for fund transfer
Continue to create awareness among customers for NOT sharing the OTP, login credentials and other
banking security information and NOT to send money as initial deposit, commission or transfer fee to
anyone claiming to provide huge usually unrealistic, return from known or unknown organizations/persons.
E. Walk-in Customers
In case of transactions carried out by a non-account based customer, i.e., a walk-in customer, where
the amount of transaction is equal to or exceeds Rupees fifty thousand, whether conducted as a single
transaction or several transactions that appear to be connected, the customer's identity and a ddress shall
be verified.
If the Bank has reason to believe that a customer is intentionally structuring a transaction into a series of
transactions below the threshold of Rs. 50000/-, the Bank shall verify identity and address of the customer
and also consider filing a Suspicious Transaction Report to FIU-IND. The identity and address of the Walk-in
customer shall be verified by obtaining KYC documents and records are to be maintained/ updated in the
system. Bank shall also verify the identity of the customers for all international money transfer operations.
Types of transactions to be covered –
1. Cash deposit by third party in customer’s accounts
2. Cash payment to walk-in customers
3. DD issued to walk-in customers
4. NEFT by walk –in customers
5. Sale of third party products viz. Insurance Policy, Mutual fund etc.
F. Issue of Demand Drafts, etc., for more than Rs. 50,000/-
Any remittance of funds by way of Demand Draft, mail / telegraphic transfer / NEFT / IMPS or any
other mode and issue of traveller’s cheques for value of Rs. 50,000/- and above shall be effected by debit to
the customer‘s account or against cheques and not against cash payment.
Bank shall not make payment of cheques / drafts / pay orders / banker‘s cheques if they are
presented beyond the period of three months from the date of such instrument.
Further, the name of the purchaser shall be incorporated on the face of the demand draft, pay
order, banker’s cheques etc by the issuing Bank with effect from September 15, 2018.
G. Sale of third-party products
When Bank sells third party products as an agent, the responsibility for ensuring compliance with
KYC / AML / CFT regulations lies with the third party. However, to mitigate reputational risk to Bank and to
enable a holistic view of a customer’s transactions, branches are advised as follows:
i. While selling third party products as agents, branches should verify the identity and address of the
walk-in customer.
ii. Branches should also maintain transaction details with regard to sale of third-party products and
related records for a period and in the manner prescribed in Point No. 8.
(Maintenance of KYC documents and preservation period).
iii. Bank’s AML software will capture, generate and analyse alerts for the purpose of filing CTR/STR in
respect of transactions relating to third party products with customers including walk-in customers.
iv. Sale of third-party products by branches as agents to customers, including walk-in customers, for Rs.
50,000/- and above must be
a. by debit to customer’s account or against cheques and
b. Obtaining & verification of the PAN given by the account based as well as walk-in customers.
H. Issuance of Prepaid Payment Instruments (PPIs):
Bank shall ensure that the instructions issued by Department of Payment and Settlement System of
Reserve Bank of India through their Master Direction are strictly adhered to.
Monitoring of Transactions (On-going Due Diligence)
Ongoing monitoring is an essential element of effective KYC / AML procedures. Branches should exercise
ongoing due diligence with respect to every customer and closely examine the transactions to ensure that
they are consistent with the customer’s profile and source of funds as per extant instructions. The ongoing
due diligence may be based on the following principles:
a. The extent of monitoring will depend on the risk category of the account. High risk accounts have
to be subjected to more intensify monitoring.
b. Branches should pay particular attention to the following types of transactions:
i. Large and complex transactions, and those with unusual patterns, which have no apparent
economic rationale or legitimate purpose.
ii. Transactions which exceed the thresholds prescribed for specific categories of accounts.
iii. Transactions involving large amounts of cash inconsistent with the normal and expected activity
of the customer.
iv. High account turnover inconsistent with the size of the balance maintained.
v. Deposit of third-party cheques, drafts, etc. in the existing and newly opened accounts
followed by cash withdrawals for large amounts For ongoing due diligence, bank may consider
adopting appropriate innovations including artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI & ML)
technologies to support effective monitoring
c. Bank put in place a system of periodical review of risk categorization of accounts and the need for
applying enhanced due diligence measures. Such review of risk categorization of customers shall be
carried out at a periodicity of not less than once in six months.
d. Branches closely monitor the transactions in accounts of marketing firms, especially accounts of
Multi-level Marketing (MLM) Companies. Branches should analyze data in cases where a large number
of cheque books are sought by the company, there are multiple small deposits (generally in cash)
across the country in one bank account and where a large number of cheques are issued bearing
similar amounts / dates. Where such features are noticed by the branches and in case they find such
unusual operations in their accounts, the matter should be immediately reported to Reserve Bank
and other appropriate authorities such as FIU-IND.
e. Supervisors should keep a vigil over the transactions involving huge amounts. Transactions should
generally have a bearing with the occupation and /or line of business of the account holders. In case
of any doubt, necessary enquiries should be made with the account holders.
f. While accepting the cheque for collection, it is to be ensured that the name mentioned in the
challan and name of the beneficiary of the instrument are same.
g. Branches are advised to mandatorily obtain either PAN or Form 60/61 (if PAN is not available) for
opening of accounts and also at the time of accepting cash receipt for Rs. 50,000/- and above. If the
customer appears to be structuring the transactions into a serious of transactions below the
threshold of Rs. 50,000/-, branches are required to obtain PAN or Form 60/61 (if PAN is not available)
from the customer. Branches are advised to aggregate the split transactions across accounts of
same customer to decide on the matter of obtention of PAN or Form 60/61, wherever the aggregate
amount of transactions is Rs. 50,000/- and above.
h. All the staff members are instructed to maintain the standards of good conduct and behavior
expected of them and not to involve in any activity that would bring disrepute to the institution and
not to advise potential customers on the lines that would be an infringement of the legal process/
could facilitate money laundering/ could defeat the KYC norms or the norms of due diligence
prescribed by RBI from time to time.
6. Correspondent Banking and Shell Bank
Correspondent Banking is the provision of banking services by one bank (the "correspondent bank")
to another bank (the "respondent bank"). These services may include cash / funds management,
international wire transfers, drawing arrangements for demand drafts and mail transfers, payable- through-
accounts, cheques clearing etc. Bank shall take the following precautions while entering into a
correspondent banking relationship:
i. Bank shall gather sufficient information to fully understand the nature of the business of the bank
including information on management, major business activities, level of AML/CFT compliance,
purpose of opening the account, identity of any third party entities that will use the correspondent
banking services, and regulatory / supervisory framework in the bank‘s home country, and publicly
available information regarding the reputation of the institution and quality of supervision, including
whether it has been subjected to ML/TF investigation or regulatory action, shall be gathered.
ii. Such relationships may be established only with the approval of the Board or by a committee
headed by the MD & CEO with clearly laid down parameters for approving such relationships, as
approved by the Board. Proposals approved by the Committee should be put up to the Board at its
next meeting for post facto approval.
iii. The responsibilities of each bank with whom correspondent banking relationship is established shall
be clearly documented.
iv. In the case of payable-through-accounts, Bank shall satisfy that the respondent bank has verified the
identity of the customers having direct access to the accounts and is undertaking ongoing 'due
diligence' on them.
v. Bank shall also ensure that the respondent bank is able to provide the relevant customer
identification data immediately on request.
vi. Bank shall be cautious while continuing relationships with correspondent banks located in
jurisdictions which have strategic deficiencies or have not made sufficient progress in
implementation of Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Recommendations.
vii. Bank shall ensure that its respondent banks have KYC/AML policies and procedures in place and apply
enhanced 'due diligence' procedures for transactions carried out through the correspondent
accounts.
viii. Bank shall not enter into a correspondent relationship with a "shell bank" (i.e. a bank which is
incorporated in a country where it has no physical presence and is unaffiliated to any regulated
financial group).
ix. Bank shall not permit its accounts to be used by shell banks.
7. Wire Transfers
Information requirements for wire transfers for the purpose of this Master Direction:
i. All cross-border wire transfers shall be accompanied by accurate, complete, and meaningful
originator and beneficiary information as mentioned below:
a. Name of the originator;
b. The originator account number where such an account is used to process the t ransaction;
c. The originator’s address, or national identity number, or customer identification number, or date
and place of birth;
d. Name of the beneficiary; and
e. The beneficiary account number where such an account is used to process the transaction.
In the absence of an account, a unique transaction reference number should be included
which permits traceability of the transaction.
ii. In case of batch transfer, where several individual cross-border wire transfers from a single
originator are bundled in a batch file for transmission to beneficiaries, they (i.e., individual transfers)
are exempted from the requirements of clause (i) above in respect of originator information,
provided that they include the originator’s account number or unique transaction reference
number, as mentioned above, and the batch file contains required and accurate originator
information, and full beneficiary information, that is fully traceable within the beneficiary country.
iii. Domestic wire transfer, where the originator is an account holder of the ordering RE, shall be
accompanied by originator and beneficiary information, as indicated for cross-border wire transfers
in (i) and (ii) above.
iv. Domestic wire transfers of rupees fifty thousand and above, where the originator is not an
account holder of the ordering RE, shall also be accompanied by originator and beneficiary
information as indicated for cross-border wire transfers.
v. REs shall ensure that all the information on the wire transfers shall be immediately made available
to appropriate law enforcement and/or prosecutorial authorities as well as FIU- IND on receiving
such requests with appropriate legal provisions.
vi. The wire transfer instructions are not intended to cover the following types of payments:
a. Any transfer that flows from a transaction carried out using a credit card / debit card / Prepaid
Payment Instrument (PPI), including through a token or any other similar reference string associated with
the card / PPI, for the purchase of goods or services, so long as the credit or debit card number or PPI id or
reference number accompanies all transfers flowing from the transaction. However, when a credit or debit
card or PPI is used as a payment system to effect a person-to-person wire transfer, the wire transfer
instructions shall apply to such transactions and the necessary information should be included in the
message.
b. Financial institution-to-financial institution transfers and settlements, where both the originator
person and the beneficiary person are regulated financial institutions acting on their own behalf.
It is, however, clarified that nothing within these instructions will impact the obligation of an RE to comply
with applicable reporting requirements under PML Act, 2002, and the Rules made there under, or any other
statutory requirement in force.
Responsibilities of ordering bank, intermediary bank and beneficiary bank, effecting wire
transfer, are as under:
i. Ordering bank:
a. The ordering bank shall ensure that all cross-border and qualifying domestic wire transfers
{viz., transactions as per clauses (iii) and (iv) of paragraph ‘A’ above}, contain required and accurate
originator information and required beneficiary information, as indicated above.
b. Customer Identification shall be made if a customer, who is not an account holder of the ordering
RE, is intentionally structuring domestic wire transfers below rupees fifty thousand to avoid reporting or
monitoring. In case of non-cooperation from the customer, efforts shall be made to establish identity and if
the same transaction is found to be suspicious, STR may be filed with FIU-IND in accordance with the PML
Rules.
c. Ordering bank shall not execute the wire transfer if it is not able to comply with the requirements
stipulated in this section.
ii. Intermediary bank:
a. RE processing an intermediary element of a chain of wire transfers shall ensure that all originator
and beneficiary information accompanying a wire transfer is retained with the transfer.
b. Where technical limitations prevent the required originator or beneficiary information
accompanying a cross-border wire transfer from remaining with a related domestic wire transfer, the
intermediary bank shall keep a record, for at least five years, of all the information received from the
ordering financial institution or another intermediary bank.
c. Intermediary bank shall take reasonable measures to identify cross-border wire transfers that lack
required originator information or required beneficiary information. Such measures should be consistent
with straight-through processing.
d. Intermediary bank shall have effective risk-based policies and procedures for determining:
(a) When to execute, reject, or suspend a wire transfer lacking required originator or required beneficiary
information; and (b) the appropriate follow-up action including seeking further information and if the
transaction is found to be suspicious, reporting to FIU-IND in accordance with the PML Rules.
iii. Beneficiary bank:
a. Beneficiary bank shall take reasonable measures, including post-event monitoring or real- time
monitoring where feasible, to identify cross-border wire transfers and qualifying domestic wire transfers
{viz., transactions as per clauses (iii) and (iv) of paragraph ‘A’ above}, that lack required originator
information or required beneficiary information.
b. Beneficiary bank shall have effective risk-based policies and procedures for determining: (a) when to
execute, reject, or suspend a wire transfer lacking required originator or required beneficiary information;
and (b) the appropriate follow-up action follow-up action including seeking further information and if the
transaction is found to be suspicious, reporting to FIU-IND in accordance with the PML Rules.
iv. Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS) providers are required to comply with all of the relevant
requirements of this Section, whether they are providing services directly or through their agents. In the
case of a MTSS provider that controls both the ordering and the beneficiary side of a wire transfer, the MTSS
provider:
a. Shall take into account all the information from both the ordering and beneficiary sides in order to
determine whether an STR has to be filed; and
b. Shall file an STR with FIU, in accordance with the PML Rules, if a transaction is found to be
suspicious.
Other Obligations
i. Obligations in respect of Bank’s engagement or involvement with unregulated entities in the
process of wire transfer
Bank shall be cognizant of their obligations under these instructions and ensure strict compliance, in respect
of engagement or involvement of any unregulated entities in the process of wire transfer. More specifically,
whenever there is involvement of any unregulated entities in the process of wire transfers, the concerned
bank shall be fully responsible for information, reporting and other requirements and therefore shall
ensure, inter alia, that,
i) there is unhindered flow of complete wire transfer information, as mandated under these
directions, from and through the unregulated entities involved;
ii) the agreement / arrangement, if any, with such unregulated entities by bank clearly stipulates the
obligations under wire transfer instructions; and
iii) A termination clause is available in their agreement / arrangement, if any, with such entities s o
that in case the unregulated entities are unable to support the wire information requirements, the
agreement / arrangement can be terminated. Existing agreements / arrangements, if any, with such entities
shall be reviewed within three months to ensure aforementioned requirements.
ii. Bank’s responsibility while undertaking cross-border wire transfer with respect to name screening
(such that they do not process cross-border transactions of designated persons and entities)
Bank are prohibited from conducting transactions with designated persons and entities and accordingly, in
addition to compliance with Chapter IX of the Master Direction, bank shall ensure that they do not process
cross-border transactions of designated persons and entities.
iii. Bank’s responsibility to fulfil record management requirements
Complete originator and beneficiary information relating to wire transfers shall be preserved by the bank
involved in the wire transfer, in accordance with Section 46 of the Master Direction.
8. Maintenance of KYC Documents and Preservation of Period
PML Act and Rules cast certain obligations on the banks with regard to maintenance, preservation and
reporting of customer account information. Bank shall take all steps considered necessary to ensure
compliance with the requirements of the Act and Rules ibid.
Maintenance of records of transactions
Bank shall maintain all necessary information in respect of transactions prescribed under Rule 3 of PML
Rules, 2005 so as to permit reconstruction of individual transactions, including the following information:
i. The nature of the transactions;
ii. The amount of the transaction and the currency in which it was denominated;
iii. The date on which the transaction was conducted; and
iv. The parties to the transaction.
Preservation of Records
Bank shall take appropriate steps to evolve a system for proper maintenance and preservation of account
information in a manner that allows data to be retrieved easily and quickly whenever required or when
requested by the competent authorities.
Bank shall maintain for at least five years from the date of transaction between the bank and the client, all
necessary records of transactions, both domestic or international, which will permit reconstruction of
individual transactions (including the amounts and types of currency involved if any) so as to provide, if
necessary, evidence for prosecution of persons involved in criminal activity.
i. Bank shall ensure that records pertaining to the identification of the customers and their address
obtained while opening the account and during the course of business relationship, are properly
preserved for at least five years after the business relationship is ended as required under Rule 10 of
the Rules ibid.
ii. The identification records and transaction data shall be made available to the competent authorities
upon request.
iii. Bank shall maintain records of the identity of clients, and records in respect of transactions with its
clients referred to in Rule 3, in hard or soft format.
iv. Evolve a system for proper maintenance and reservation of account information in a manner that
allows data to be retrieved easily and quickly whenever required or requested by competent
authorities.
v. Bank shall pay special attention to all complex, unusual large transactions and all unusual patterns
of transactions, which have no apparent economic or visible lawful purpose. The background,
including all documents / office records / memorandums pertaining to such transactions and
purpose thereof shall, as far as possible, be examined and the findings, at branch as well as Principal
Officer Level, shall be properly recorded. Such records and related documents shall be made
available to help auditors to scrutinize the transactions and also to Reserve Bank / other relevant
authorities. These records will be preserved for five years as is required under PMLA, 2002.
9. Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT)
The United Nations periodically circulates the following two lists of individuals and entities, suspected of
having terrorist links, and as approved by its Security Council (UNSC):
The United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCRs), received from Government of India, are
circulated by the Reserve Bank to all banks and FIs. Bank shall take them into account for implementation of
Section 51A of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) (UAPA) Act, 1967, as detailed under para 9.1.
Branches are required to screen customer names with UN List of terrorist individuals / entities before
creation of new CIF / opening of accounts. Branches are required to ensure that the name
(s) of the proposed customer does not match with that of the UN list of Terrorist individuals / organization /
entities, before opening any new account. AML Cell, Head Office, will also cross check the details of all existing
accounts with the updated list, on a daily basis. Branches have to verify transaction and ensure that no
account is held by or linked to any of the entities or individuals included in the list maintained for this
purpose. If the particulars of any of the account(s) have resemblance with those appearing in the list, bank
has to verify transactions carried out in such accounts and report those accounts to RBI / Financial
Intelligence Unit-INDIA apart from advising Ministry of Home Affairs as required under UAPA notification
dated February 2, 2021.
Freezing of Assets under Section 51A of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
1967
i. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA) has been amended by the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2008. Government has issued an Order dated
August 27, 2009 detailing the procedure for implementation of Section 51A of the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 for prevention of, and for coping with terrorist activities. In
terms of Section 51A, the Central Government is empowered to freeze, seize or attach funds
and other financial assets or economic resources held by on behalf of or at the direction of the
individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order, or any other person engaged in or
suspected to be engaged in terrorism and prohibit any individual or entity from making any
funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services available for the benefit of the
individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order or any other person engaged in or
suspected to be engaged in terrorism.
ii. Bank shall strictly follow the procedure laid down in the UAPA revised order dated
February 2, 2021, in supersession of the earlier order dated March 14, 2019 (Annex VI of this
policy) and ensure meticulous compliance with the Order issued by the Government.
iii. The list of Nodal Officers for UAPA is available on the website of Ministry of Home
Affairs.
Obligations under Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and their Delivery
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 (WMD Act, 2005):
(a) Bank shall ensure meticulous compliance with the “Procedure for Implementation of
Section 12A of the Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and their Delivery Systems
(Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005” laid down in terms of Section 12A of the
WMD Act, 2005 vide Order dated January 30, 2023, by the Ministry of Finance,
Government o f India (Annex X of this Master Direction).
(b) In accordance with paragraph 3 of the aforementioned Order, bank shall ensure not to
carry out transactions in case the particulars of the individual / entity match with the
particulars in the d esignated list.
(c) Further, bank shall run a check, on the given parameters, at the time of establishing a
relation with a customer and on a periodic basis to verify whether individuals and
entities in the designated list are holding any funds, financial asset, etc., in the form of
bank account, etc.
(d) In case of match in the above cases, bank shall immediately inform the transaction
details with full particulars of the funds, financial assets or economic resources involved
to the Central Nodal Officer (CNO), designated as the authority to exercise powers
under Section 12A of the WMD Act, 2005. A copy of the communication shall be sent
to State Nodal Officer, where the account / transaction is held and to the RBI. Bank
shall file an STR with FIU-IND covering all transactions in the accounts, covered above,
carried through or attempted. It may be noted that in terms of Paragraph 1 of the
Order, Director, FIU-India has been designated as the CNO.
(e) Bank may refer to the designated list, as amended from time to time, available on the
portal of FIU- India.
(f) In case there are reasons to believe beyond doubt that funds or assets held by a
customer would fall under the purview of clause (a) or (b) of sub-section (2) of Section
12A of the WMD Act, 2005, bank shall prevent such individual/entity from conducting
financial transactions, under intimation to the CNO by email, FAX and by post, without
delay.
(g) In case an order to freeze assets under Section 12A is received by the bank from the
CNO, bank shall, without delay, take necessary action to comply with the Order.
(h) The process of unfreezing of funds, etc., shall be observed as per paragraph 7 of the
Order. Accordingly, copy of application received from an individual/entity regarding
unfreezing shall be forwarded by RE along with full details of the asset frozen, as given
by the applicant, to the CNO by email, FAX and by post, within two working days.
Bank shall verify every day, the ‘UNSCR 1718 Sanctions List of Designated Individuals
and Entities to take into account any modifications to the list in terms of
additions, deletions or other changes and also ensure compliance with the ‘
Implementation of Security Council Resolution on Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea Order, 2017’, as amended from time to time by the Central Government.
In addition to the above, bank shall take into account – (a) other UNSCRs and (b) lists in
the first schedule and the fourth schedule of UAPA, 1967 and any amendments to the
same for compliance with the Government orders on implementation of Section 51A of
the UAPA and Section 12A of the WMD Act.
Jurisdictions that do not or insufficiently apply the FATF Recommendations
a) FATF Statements circulated by Reserve Bank of India from time to time, and publicly
available information, for identifying countries, which do not or insufficiently apply the
FATF Recommendations, shall be considered. Risks arising from the deficiencies in
AML/CFT regime of the jurisdictions included in the FATF Statement shall be taken into
account.
b) Special attention shall be given to business relationships and transactions with persons
(including legal persons and other financial institutions) from or in countries that do not
or insufficiently apply the FATF Recommendations and jurisdictions included in FATF
Statements.
Explanation: The processes referred to in (a) & (b) above do not preclude REs from having
legitimate trade and business transactions with the countries and jurisdictions mentioned in the
FATF statement.
c) The background and purpose of transactions with persons (including legal persons and
other financial institutions) from jurisdictions included in FATF Statements and countries that do
not or insufficiently apply the FATF Recommendations shall be examined, and written findings
together with all documents shall be retained and shall be made available to Reserve
Bank/other relevant authorities, on request.
d) REs are encouraged to leverage latest technological innovations and tools for effective
implementation of name screening to meet the sanctions requirements.
10. Reporting Requirements
Reporting requirement under Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA)
and Common Reporting Standards (CRS)
Under FATCA and CRS, Bank is required to adhere to the provisions of Income Tax Rules 114F,
114G and 114H as a Reporting Financial Institution as defined in Income Tax Rule 114F.
Roles & responsibilities of Planning Department, NRI Cell
Planning Department NRI Cell, HO is responsible for submission of report to Income Tax
Department as per following directions:-
(a) Register on the related e-filling portal of Income Tax Department as Reporting Financial
Institutions at the link https://incometaxindiaefiling.gov.in/ post login -
-> My Account --> Register as Reporting Financial Institution,
(b) Submit online reports by using the digital signature of the ‘Designated Director’ by either
uploading the Form 61B or ‘NIL’ report, for which, the schema prepared by Central Board of Direct
Taxes (CBDT) shall be referred to. NRI Cell, Planning Department HO is submitting report to
Income Tax Department.
Explanation: Bank shall refer to the spot reference rates published by Foreign Exchange Dealers’
Association of India (FEDAI) on their website at http://www.fedai.org.in/RevaluationRates.aspx
for carrying out the due diligence procedure for the purposes of identifying reportable accounts
in terms of Rule 114H.
(c) Develop Information Technology (IT) framework for carrying out due diligence procedure
and for recording and maintaining the same, as provided in Rule 114H.
(d) Develop a system of audit for the IT framework and compliance with Rules 114F, 114G
and 114H of Income Tax Rules.
(e) Constitute a “High Level Monitoring Committee” under the Designated Director or any
other equivalent functionary to ensure compliance. Bank has appointed Executive Director as
Designated Director of the Bank as required to ensure overall compliance.
(f) Ensure compliance with updated instructions/ rules/ guidance notes/ Press releases/
issued on the subject by Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) from time to time and available
on the web site http://www.incometaxindia.gov.in/Pages/default.aspx. Planning Department,
NRI Cell shall take note of the following:
i. updated Guidance Note on FATCA and CRS issued by RBI
ii. a press release on ‘Closure of Financial Accounts’ under Rule 114H
Reporting to Financial Intelligence Unit – India
a. In terms of Rule 3 of the PML (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005, Bank is required to
furnish information relating to cash transactions, cash transactions integrally connected to each
other, and all transactions involving receipts by non-profit organisations [NPO means any entity
or organisation t hat is registered as a trust or a society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860
or any similar State legislation or a company registered under (erstwhile Section 25 of
Companies Act, 1956) Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013], cash transactions where forged or
counterfeit currency notes or bank notes have been used as genuine, cross border wire transfer,
etc. to the Director, Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND) in respect of transactions referred
to in Rule 3 at the following address:
The Director, FIU-IND, Financial Intelligence Unit-India, 6th Floor, Jeevan Bharti Building,
Connaught P lace New Delhi-110001. Website - http://fiuindia.gov.in/.
b. FIU-IND has released a comprehensive reporting format guide to describe the
specifications of prescribed reports to FIU-IND. FIU-IND has also developed a Report Generation
Utility and Report Validation Utility to assist reporting entities in the preparation of prescribed
reports. The Office Memorandum issued on Reporting Formats under Project
Latest Reporting guide of FIU - IND containing all relevant details are available on FIU‘s website.
FIU- INDIA in their REPORTING FORMAT GUIDE, informed that for account based transaction,
bank shall report in ACCOUNT BASED REPORTING FORMAT (ARF) and whenever transaction
without account based relationship with the customer, bank shall report in TRANSACTION
BASED REPORT F ORMAT (TRF).
c. In terms of Rule 8, while furnishing information to the Director, FIU-IND, delay of each
day in not reporting a transaction or delay of each day in rectifying a misrepresented transaction
beyond the time limit as specified in the Rule shall constitute a separate violation. Branches shall
take note of the timeliness of the reporting requirements and submit the reports within the
timelines.
As a part of transaction monitoring mechanism, Bank shall put in place an appropriate software
application to throw alerts when the transactions are inconsistent with risk categorization and
updated profile of the customers. The software shall be robust enough to throw the alerts for
effective identification and reporting of suspicious transactions.
As per Rule 7 of PML Rules, the procedure and manner of furnishing information shall be as
under:
i. The Bank shall communicate to the Director, FIU-IND the name, designation and address
of the Designated Director and the Principal Officer.
ii. The Principal Officer shall furnish the information to the Director on the basis of
information available with the reporting entity. A copy of such information shall be retained by
the Principal Officer for the purposes of official record.
iii. The Bank shall evolve an internal mechanism having regard to any guidelines issued by
regulator, for detecting the transactions referred for furnishing information about such
transactions in such form as may be directed by its Regulator.
iv. The Bank, its Designated Director, officers and employees shall observe the procedure
and the m anner of furnishing information as specified by its Regulator.
Cash Transaction Reports (CTR)
The Bank shall scrupulously adhere to the following:
 The Cash Transaction Report (CTR) for each month shall be submitted to FIU-IND by 15th
of the succeeding month. Bank shall ensure to submit CTR for every month to FIUIND within the
prescribed time schedule.
 All cash transactions, where forged or counterfeit Indian currency notes have been used
as genuine shall be reported by the Principal Officer of the Bank to FIU-IND in the specified
format (Counterfeit Currency Report- CCR) by 15th day of the next month. These cash transactions
shall also include transactions where forgery of valuable security or documents has taken place
and may be reported to FIU-IND in plain text form.
 While filing CTR, details of individual transactions below Rupees Fifty Thousand need
not be furnished.
 CTR shall contain only the transactions carried out by the Bank on behalf of their clients
/ customers excluding transactions between the internal accounts of the Bank.
 A summary of cash transaction report for the Bank as a whole shall be compiled by the
Principal Officer of the Bank every month in physical form as per the format specified. The
summary shall be signed by the Principal Officer and submitted to FIU¬IND. In case of Cash
Transaction Reports (CTR) compiled centrally by banks for the branches having Core
Banking Solution (CBS) at their central data centre level, banks may generate centralized Cash
Transaction Reports (CTR) in respect of branches under Core Banking Solution at one point for
onward transmission to FIU-IND, provided the CTR is generated in the format prescribed by FIU-
IND.
 A copy of the monthly CTR submitted to FIU-India in respect of the branches shall be
available at the Bank for production to auditors / inspectors, when asked for.
 The instruction on ‘Maintenance of records of transactions’ and ‘Preservation of
records’ as contained at Para 8.1 and 8.2 respectively shall be scrupulously followed by the
branches.
Suspicious Transaction Reports (STR)
i. While determining suspicious transactions, Bank shall be guided by the definition of
suspicious transaction as contained in PMLA Rules as amended from time to time.
ii. It is likely that in some cases transactions are abandoned/ aborted by customers on
being asked to give some details or to provide documents. Bank shall report all such attempted
transactions in STRs, even if not completed by the customers, irrespective of the amount of the
transaction.
iii. Bank shall make STRs if there is a reasonable ground to believe that the transaction
involves proceeds of crime irrespective of the amount of transaction and / or the threshold limit
envisaged for predicate offences in part B of Schedule of PMLA, 2002.
iv. The Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) shall be furnished within 7 days of arriving at a
conclusion that any transaction, whether cash or non-cash, or a series of transactions integrally
connected are of suspicious nature. The Principal Officer shall record his reasons for treating any
transaction or a series of transactions as suspicious. It shall be ensured that there is no undue
delay in arriving at such a conclusion once a suspicious transaction report is received from a
branch or any other office. Such report shall be made available to the competent authorities on
request.
v. In the context of creating KYC/AML awareness among the staff and for generating alerts
for suspicious transactions, branches may consider the indicative list of suspicious activities
contained in Annexure-V of this Note.
vi. Bank shall not put any restrictions on operations in the accounts where an STR has been
filed. Bank and their employees shall keep the fact of furnishing of STR strictly confidential, as
required under PML rules. Moreover, it shall be ensured that there is no tipping off to the
customer at any level.
The bank has implemented centralized processing and submission of STRs on the following lines:
AML/CFT Cell, HO shall process the AML alerts generated / reported and escalate suspicious
transactions, if any for review and submit the STRs to FIU-IND, Delhi.
Non-Profit Organizations Report (NTR)
The report of all transactions involving receipts by non-profit organizations of value more than
Rupees ten lakh or its equivalent in foreign currency should be submitted every month to the
Director, FIU-IND by 15th of the succeeding month in the prescribed format.
Cross-border Wire Transfer Report (CBWTR)
Cross-border Wire Transfer Report (CWTR) is required to be filed by 15th of succeeding month
for all cross-border wire transfers of the value of more than Rupees five lakh or its equivalent in
foreign currency where either the origin or destination of fund is in India.
As per recent amendments to Prevention of Money Laundering (PML) Rules, every reporting
entity is required to maintain the record of all transactions including the record of all cross
border wire transfers of more than Rs. 5 lakh or its equivalent in foreign currency, where either
the origin or destination of the fund is in India.
The information shall be furnished electronically in the FIN-Net module developed by FIUIND.
11. General Guidelines
Confidentiality of customer information
The information collected from the customer for the purpose of opening of account shall be
treated as confidential and details thereof shall not be divulged for the purpose of cross selling
etc. Information sought from the customer shall be relevant to the perceived risk and be non-
intrusive. Any other information that is sought from the customer shall be called for separately
only after the account has been opened, with his/her express consent and in a different form,
distinctly separate from the application form. It shall be indicated clearly to the customer that
providing such information is optional.
Secrecy Obligations and Sharing of Information
Bank shall maintain secrecy regarding the customer information which arises out of the
contractual r elationship between the banker and customer.
Information collected from customers for the purpose of opening of account shall be treated as
confidential and details thereof shall not be divulged for the purpose of cross selling, or for any
other purpose without the express permission of the customer.
While considering the requests for data / information from Government and other agencies,
Bank shall satisfy itself that the information being sought is not of such a nature as will violate
the provisions of the laws relating to secrecy in the banking transactions.
The exceptions to the said rule shall be as under:
a. Where disclosure is under compulsion of law
b. Where there is a duty to the public to disclose,
c. the interest of bank requires disclosure and
d. Where the disclosure is made with the express or implied consent of the
customer.
Avoiding hardship to customers
Branches should keep in mind the spirit of instructions issued by the RBI and avoid undue
hardships to individuals who are otherwise classified as low risk customers.
Sensitizing Customers
Implementation of AML/CFT policy may require certain information from customers of a
personal nature or which had not been called for earlier. The purpose of collecting such
information should be questioned by the customer and may often lead to avoidable complaints
and litigation. Bank shall, therefore, prepare specific literature / pamphlets etc. to educate the
customer regarding the objectives of the AML/CFT requirements for which their cooperation is
solicited.
Hiring of Employees
KYC norms / AML standards / CFT measures have been prescribed to ensure that criminals are
not allowed to misuse the banking channels. Therefore, Bank shall put in place adequate
screening mechanism as an integral part of its personnel recruitment / hiring process.
Bank shall endeavor to ensure that the staff dealing with / being deployed for KYC/AML/CFT
matters have high integrity and ethical standards, good understanding of extant KYC/AML/CFT
standards, effective communication skills and ability to keep up with the changing KYC/AML/CFT
landscape, nationally and internationally. Bank shall also strive to develop an environment
which fosters open communication and high integrity amongst the staff.
Employee Training
Bank shall have an ongoing employee training programme so that the members of the staff are
adequately trained in KYC/AML/CFT policy. The focus of the training shall be different for
frontline staff, compliance staff and staff dealing with new customers. Staff /Officials working in
AML Cell (Head Office) should complete AML-KYC Certification course from IIBF mandatorily.
The front desk staff needs to be specially trained to handle issues arising from lack of customer
education. Proper staffing of the audit function with persons adequately trained and well-versed
in KYC/AML/CFT policies of the Bank, regulation and related issues shall be ensured.
11.6 Accounts under Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 2010 (FCRA)
RBI vide letter no:DOR.AML.No.1783/14.08.001/2020-21 dated December 09, 2020.RBI has
informed that Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Government of India has issued gazette
notification regarding the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2020, The said
amendment Act has been notified on September 28, 2020 and has been enforced from
September 29, 2020 through notification of date
In terms of the amended Section 17 of the above-mentioned amendment act, every person/
NGO/ association who have been granted FCRA certificate of registration under FCRA 2010 and
prior permission to receive foreign contribution shall henceforth receive such contribution only
in an account designated as “FCRA Account” in the specified branch (Main Branch) of State
Bank of India (SBI) at New Delhi. No person/ NGO/ association shall receive foreign
contributions received in accordance with the FCRA 2010 in any account other than the one
designated as “FCRA Account” as per section 17(1) of the FCRA Act, 2010 in the specified branch,
i.e., New Delhi Main Branch of the SBI, Sansad Marg, New Delhi, post opening of such an
account.
In terms of section 46 of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010, the MHA has advised
to instruct all the scheduled banks to stop receiving/ crediting with effect from April 01, 2021
any foreign contributions in any account other than the “designated FCRA Account” in the
aforesaid branch of the SBI at New Delhi, which has been opened by the person who has been
granted certificate or prior permission under the FCRA, 2010. The period from September 29,
2020 till March 31, 2021 will be treated as transition period to facilitate opening of the
designated “FCRA Account”.
MHA has also clarified that the person/ NGO/ association would be free to retain their present
account as “other FCRA Account” in any branch of a scheduled bank of their choice which they
can link with the “designated FCRA Account” opened in the SBI, New Delhi Main Branch as
specified by the Central Government. All foreign contributions shall be received only in the
“designated FCRA Account” with the SBI from the date of opening of such account or April 01,
2021, whichever is earlier.
All branches and offices to strict adherence to above guidelines of RBI. The standard operating
procedure for opening FCRA Account at the SBI, New Delhi Main Branch is available on the
website:
11.7 Technology requirements
The AML software in use at the Bank shall be comprehensive and robust enough to capture all
cash and other transactions, including those relating to walk-in customers, sale of gold / silver /
platinum, payment of dues of credit cards / reloading of prepaid / travel cards, third party
products, and transactions involving internal accounts of the Bank.
ANNEX – I
Digital KYC Process
A. The bank shall develop an application for digital KYC process which shall be made
available at customer touch points for undertaking KYC of their customers and the KYC process
shall be undertaken only through this authenticated application of the bank.
B. The access of the Application shall be controlled by the bank and it should be ensured
that the same is not used by unauthorized persons. The Application shall be accessed only
through login-id and password or Live OTP or Time OTP controlled mechanism given by bank to
its authorized officials.
C. The customer, for the purpose of KYC, shall visit the location of the authorized official of
the bank or vice-versa. The original OVD shall be in possession of the customer.
D. The bank must ensure that the live photograph of the customer is taken by the
authorized officer and the same photograph is embedded in the Customer Application Form
(CAF). Further, the system Application of the RE shall put a water-mark in readable form having
CAF number, GPS coordinates, authorized official’s name, unique employee Code (assigned by
banks) and Date (DD:MM:YYYY) and time stamp (HH:MM:SS) on the captured live photograph of
the customer.
E. The Application of the bank shall have the feature that only live photograph of the
customer is captured and no printed or video-graphed photograph of the customer is captured.
The background behind the customer while capturing live photograph should be of white colour
and no other person shall come into the frame while capturing the live photograph of the
customer.
F. Similarly, the live photograph of the original OVD or proof of possession of Aadhaar
where offline verification cannot be carried out (placed horizontally), shall be captured vertically
from above and water-marking in readable form as mentioned above shall be done. No skew or
tilt in the mobile device shall be there while capturing the live photograph of the original
documents.
G. The live photograph of the customer and his original documents shall be captured in
proper light so that they are clearly readable and identifiable.
H. Thereafter, all the entries in the CAF shall be filled as per the documents and
information f urnished by the customer. In those documents where Quick Response (QR) code is
available, such details can be auto-populated by scanning the QR code instead
of manual filing the details. For example, in case of physical Aadhaar/e-Aadhaar downloaded from UIDAI
where QR code is available, the details like name, gender, date of birth and address can be auto-
populated by scanning the QR available on Aadhaar/eAadhaar.
I. Once the above mentioned process is completed, a One Time Password (OTP) message
containing the text that ‘Please verify the details filled in form before sharing
OTP’ shall be sent to customer’s own mobile number. Upon successful validation of the OTP, it will be
treated as customer signature on CAF. However, if the customer does not have his/her own mobile
number, then mobile number of his/her family/relatives/known persons may be used for this purpose
and be clearly mentioned in CAF. In any case, the mobile number of authorized officer registered with
the RE shall not be used for customer signature. The bank must check that the mobile number used in
customer signature shall not be the mobile number of the authorized officer.
J. The authorized officer shall provide a declaration about the capturing of the live
photograph of customer and the original document. For this purpose, the authorized official shall be
verified with One Time Password (OTP) which will be sent to his mobile number registered with the
bank. Upon successful OTP validation, it shall be treated as authorized officer’s signature on the
declaration. The live photograph of the authorized official shall also be captured in this authorized
officer’s declaration.
K. Subsequent to all these activities, the Application shall give information about the
completion of the process and submission of activation request to activation officer of the bank, and
also generate the transaction id / reference id number of the process. The authorized officer shall
intimate the details regarding transaction id / reference id number to customer for future reference.
L. The authorized officer of the bank shall check and verify that:-
(i) Information available in the picture of document is matching with the information
entered by authorized officer in CAF.
(ii) Live photograph of the customer matches with the photo available in the document;
and
(iii) All of the necessary details in CAF including mandatory field are filled properly; On
Successful verification, the CAF shall be digitally signed by authorized officer of the bank who will take a
print of CAF, get signatures / thumb impression of customer at appropriate place, then scan and upload
the same in system. Original hard copy may be returned to the customer.
ANNEX – II
Customer Identification Procedure-Features to be verified and Documents that may
be obtained from Customers:
Feature Documents
Accounts of Individuals
For undertaking Customer Due Diligence (CDD), bank shall obtain the
Proof of Identity and Address following from an individual while establishing an account-based
relationship or while dealing with the individual who is a beneficial owner,
authorized signatory or the power of attorney holder related to any legal
entity.
A. Aadhaar Number where,
 the customer is desirous of receiving any benefit or subsidy, benefit or
service for which the expenditure is incurred from, under any scheme
notified by Central Government or State Government; or
 the customer decides to submit his Aadhaar number voluntarily to a
bank without consultation with the Unique Identification Authority of India;
or
B. The proof of possession of Aadhaar number where offline verification
can be carried out; or
C. The proof of possession of Aadhaar number where offline verification
cannot be carried out or any OVD or the equivalent e- document thereof
containing the details of his identity and address;
D. The Permanent Account Number or the equivalent e-document
thereof or Form No. 60 as defined in Income tax Rules, 1962; and
E. Such other documents including in respect of the nature of business
and financial status of the customer, or the equivalent e- documents thereof
as may be required by the bank.
Provided that where the customer has submitted,
(i) Aadhaar number under clause (A) above, branch shall carry out
authentication of the customer’s Aadhaar number using e-KYC
authentication facility provided by the Unique Identification Authority of
India.
Further, in such case, if customer wants to provide a current address,
different from the address as per the identity information available in the
Central Identities Data Repository, he may give a self-declaration
to that effect to the bank.
Feature Documents
(ii) Proof of possession of Aadhaar under clause (B) above where
offline verification can be carried out, the bank shall carry out offline
verification.
(iii) An equivalent e-document of any OVD, the bank shall verify
the digital signature and take a live photo.
(iv) Any OVD or proof of possession of Aadhaar number under
clause (C) above where offline verification cannot be carried out, the
bank shall carry out verification through digital KYC.
Provided that for a period not beyond such date as may be notified by
the Government for a class of Bank, instead of carrying out digital KYC,
the Bank pertaining to such class may obtain a certified copy of the
proof of possession of Aadhaar number or the OVD and a recent
photograph where an equivalent e- document is not submitted.
Officially Valid Documents (OVD) are as under:
 Proof of Possession of Aadhaar Number
 Passport
 Driving License
 Voter’s Identity Card issued by Election Commission of India
 Job Card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer of the
State Government
 Letter issued by the National Population Register containing
details of name and address
 Any other document as notified by the Central Government in
consultation with the Regulator.
Accounts of Proprietorship Concerns
For Proprietary concerns, Customer Due Diligence of the individual
(proprietor) are to be carried out and any two of the following
documents or the equivalent e-documents in the name of the
proprietary concern should be submitted:
i. Registration certificate (in the case of a registered concern).
ii. Certificate / license issued by the Municipal authorities under Shop
and Establishment Act.
Proof of name, address and
iii. Sales and income tax returns. iv. CST/VAT/ GST certificate
activity of the concern
(provisional / final).
v. Certificate / registration document issued by Sales Tax / Service
Tax / Professional Tax authorities.
vi. Complete Income Tax Return (not just the acknowledgement) in
the name of the sole proprietor where the firm's income is reflected,
duly authenticated / acknowledged by the Income Tax
authorities.
Feature Documents
vii. Utility bills such as electricity, water, landline telephone bills, etc
viii. IEC (Importer Exporter Code) issued to the proprietary concern by
the office of DGFT or License/certificate of practice issued in the name
of the proprietary concern by any professional body incorporated under
a statute.
Though the default rule is that any two documents mentioned above
should be provided as activity proof by a Proprietary concern, in cases
where the branches are satisfied that it is not possible to furnish two
such documents, they would have the discretion to accept only one of
those documents as activity proof. In such cases, the branches,
however, would have to undertake contact point verification, collect
such information as would be required to establish the existence of
such firm, confirm, clarify and satisfy themselves that the business
activity has been verified from the address of the proprietary concern.
Credit facility would include Term Loans, Overdraft, Cash Credit,
Working Capital Limits, Bank Guarantee, Letter of Credit, Export
Finance, Mortgage Loans, Warehouse Receipt Finance, Factoring, Bill
Discounting, Cheque Discounting, Import Finance (Buyer's Credit),
Treasury Limits or any other limit either secured or unsecured.
Accounts of Partnership Firms
Where the customer is a partnership firm, certified copies of following
documents or the equivalent e-documents of all the following
documents are to be submitted:
i. Registration Certificate ii. Partnership Deed
iii. Permanent Account Number of the Partnership Firm
iv. Any Officially Valid Document which contains proof of identity and
address, one recent photograph and Permanent Account No or Form
60/61 of related beneficial owner, managers, officers or employees, as
the case may be, holding an attorney to transacts on its behalf.
Credit facility would include Term Loans, Overdraft, Cash Credit,
Working Capital Limits, Bank Guarantee, Letter of Credit, Export
Finance, Mortgage Loans, Warehouse Receipt Finance, Factoring, Bill
Discounting, Cheque Discounting, Import Finance (Buyer's Credit),
Treasury Limits or any other limit either secured or unsecured.
Feature Documents
Accounts of Companies
Where the customer is a company, certified copies of documents or the
equivalent e-documents of all the following documents are to be
submitted:
i. Certificate of incorporation
ii. Memorandum and Articles of Association
iii. Permanent Account Number of the Company
iv. A resolution from the Board of Directors and Power of Attorney
granted to its managers, officers or employees to transact on its behalf.
v. Any Officially Valid Document containing proof of identity and
address, one recent photograph and Permanent Account Number or
Form 60/61 of related beneficial owner, managers, officers and
employees, as the case may be, holding an attorney to transact on its
behalf.
Credit facility would include Term Loans, Overdraft, Cash Credit,
Working Capital Limits, Bank Guarantee, Letter of Credit, Export
Finance, Mortgage Loans, Warehouse Receipt Finance, Factoring, Bill
Discounting, Cheque Discounting, Import Finance (Buyer's Credit),
Treasury Limits or any other limit either secured or unsecured.
Accounts of Limited Liability Partnership (LLP)
i. Certified copy of incorporation documents filed with the registrar
companies.
ii. Certificate issued by the registrar of the companies
iii. Copy of LLP Agreement signed by all the partners. In case, there
is no LLP agreement, schedule I of LLP Act signed by all the partners will
prevail.
iv. Any Officially Valid Document which contains proof of identity
and address in respect of person holding an attorney to transacts on its
behalf and
v. Permanent Account Number or Form 60/61 as defined in the
Income Tax Rules, 1962 issued to the person holding a power of
Attorney to transact on its behalf.
Accounts of Trusts
Feature Documents
Where the customer is a Trust, certified copies of documents or the equivalent e-
documents of all the following documents are to be submitted:
i. Registration Certificate
ii. Trust Deed
iii. Permanent Account Number or Form 60/61 of the Trust
iv. Any Certified Officially Valid Document which contains proof of identity /
address, one recent photograph and Permanent Account Number of Form 60/61 of
the related beneficial owner, managers,
officers or employees holding an attorney to transact on its behalf.
Accounts of Unincorporated Association or Body of Individuals
Where the customer is an unincorporated association or a body of individuals,
certified copies of documents or the equivalent e- documents of all the following
documents are to be submitted:
i. Resolution of the managing body of such association or body of
individuals.
ii. Permanent Account Number or Form 60/61 of the unincorporated
association or a body of individuals.
iii. Power of Attorney granted to the person who will transact on its behalf.
iv. Any Certified Officially Valid Document containing proof of identity and
address, one recent photograph and Permanent Account Numbers of Form 60/61 of
the person, beneficial owner, managers, officers or employees holding an attorney to
transact on its behalf.
Accounts of Governments or its Departments, Societies, Universities and Local Bodies
like village panchayats
The certified copies of the following documents or the equivalent e- documents
thereof are to be submitted:
i. Document showing name of the person authorized to act on behalf of the
entity;
ii. Any Certified Officially Valid Document which contains proof of identity /
address in respects of managers, officers and employees holding an attorney to
transacts on its behalf.
iii. PAN or Form 60/61 as defined in the Income Tax Rules, 1962 issued to the person
holding an attorney to transact on behalf of the entity.
iv. Such documents as may be required to establish the legal
existence of such an entity / juridical person
Feature Documents
Branches to obtain only the documents as mentioned above and not to accept any other document for
KYC purpose.
ANNEX – III
List of Low / Medium / High risk Customers based on the recommendations of IBA
Working Group.
APPENDIX – A
Low Risk Medium Risk High Risk
- Ex-staff, Govt. / Semi - Gas Station - Individuals entities in various United Nations’
Govt. Employees - Car / Boat / Plane Dealership Security Council Resolutions (UNSCRs) such as
- Illiterate Individual - Electronics (wholesale) UN 1267 etc.
- Local Authority - Travel agency - Individuals or entities listed in the schedule to
- Other - Used car sales the order under Section 51A of the Unlawful
Banks Pensioner - Telemarketers Activities
- Public Ltd. - Providers of - (Prevention) Act, 1967 relating to the
- Public Sector telecommunications service, purposes of prevention of, and for coping with
- Public Sector Bank internet cafe, IDD call service, terrorist activities
Staff phone cards, phone center - Individuals and entities in watch lists issued by
- Regional Rural Banks - Dot-com company or Interpol and other similar internationals
- Govt./Semi Govt. internet business organizations.
- Local Body - Pawnshops - Customers with dubious reputation as per
- Senior Citizens - Auctioneers public information available or commercially
- Self Help Groups - Cash-Intensive Businesses such available watch lists Individual and entities
as restaurants, retail shops, specifically identified by regulators, FIU and
parking garages, fast food stores. other competent authorities as high-risk
- movie theaters, etc. Customers conducting their business
- Sole Practitioners or Law relationship or transactions in unusual
Firms (small, little known). circumstances, such as significant and
- Notaries (small, unexplained geographic distance between the
little known) . institution and the location of the Customer,
- Secretarial Firms (small, frequent and unexplained movement of
little known) accounts to different institutions, frequent and
- Accountants (small, little unexplained movement of funds between
known firms) institutions in various geographic locations etc.
- Venture capital companies Customers based in high risk Countries
- Blind / jurisdictions or locations (refer Appendix C)
- Purdanashin - Politically exposed persons (PEPs) of foreign
- Registered Body origin, Customers who are close relatives of PEPs
- Corporate Body and accounts of which a PEP is the
ultimate beneficial owner;
- Joint Sector partnership - Non-resident Customer
- Embassies / Consulates
- Off-shore (foreign) corporation / business
- Non face-to-face Customers
- High net worth individuals
- Firms with 'sleeping partners'
- Companies having close family shareholding
or beneficial ownership
- Complex business ownership
- Structures, which can make it easier to
conceal underlying beneficiaries, where there
is legitimate commercial rationale.
- Shell companies which have no physical
presence companies in the country in which it
is incorporated. The existing simply of a local
agent or low level staff does not constitute
physical presence
- Investment Management / Money
Management Company / Personal
- Investment Company
- Customer Accounts managed by
professional service providers such as law
firms, accountants, agents, brokers, fund
managers, trustees, custodians etc.
- Trusts, charities, NGOs / NPOs (especially
those operating on a “cross border” basis)
unregulated clubs and organisations receiving
donations (excluding NPOs / NGOs promoted
by
- United Nations or its agencies)
- Money Service Business: including seller of:
Money Orders / Travelers‘ Cheques / Money
Transmission / Cheque Cashing / Currency
Dealing or Exchange
- Business accepting third party cheques
(except supermarkets or retail stores that
accept payroll cheques / cash payroll cheques)
- Gambling / gaming including “Junket
Operators” arranging gambling tours
- Dealers in high value or precious goods (e.g.
jewel, gem and precious metals dealers, art
and antique dealers and auction houses,
estate agents and real estate brokers)
- Customers engaged in a business which is
associated with higher levels of corruption
(e.g. Arms manufacturers, dealers and
intermediaries)
- Customers engaged in industries that might
relate to nuclear proliferation activities or
explosives
- Customers that may appear to be multilevel
marketing companies etc.
- Customers dealing in Real Estate business
(transactions need to be monitored with
enhanced due diligence)
- Associations/Clubs
- Foreign Nationals
- NGO
- Overseas Corporate Bodies
- Bullion dealers and jewellers (subject to
enhanced due diligence)
- Pooled accounts
- Other Cash Intensive business
- Shell Banks - Transactions in corresponding
banking
- Non-Bank Financial Institution
- Stock brokerage
- Import / Export
- Executors/Administrators
- HUF
- Minor Accounts under Foreign Contribution
Regulation Act
The above categorization of customers under risk perception is only illustrative and not exhaustive.
Updating KYC of low risk customers: Every 10 years.
Updating KYC of medium risk customers: Every 8 years Updating KYC of high-risk customers:
Every 2 years
APPENDIX – B
High / Medium Risk Products and Services
Branches / Offices are required to pay special attention to any money laundering threats that may arise
from new or developing technologies including internet banking that might favour anonymity, and take
measures, if needed, to prevent their use in money laundering schemes. Presently a variety of Electronic Cards
are used by customers for buying goods and services, drawing cash from ATMs, and for electronic transfer of
funds. Branches should ensure that appropriate KYC procedures are duly applied before issuing the Cards
including Add-on / Supplementary Cards to the customers Indicative list of High / Medium Risk Products and
Services
1. Electronic funds payment services such as Electronic cash (e.g., stored value and pay roll cards),
funds transfer (domestic and international) etc.
2. Electronic banking
3. Private banking (Domestic and International)
4. Trust and Asset Management Services
5. Monetary instruments such as Travelers‘ Cheque
6. Foreign correspondent accounts
7. Trade finance (such as letters of credit)
8. Special use or concentration accounts
9. Lending activities, particularly loans secured by cash collateral and marketable securities
10. Non-deposit account services such as Non-deposit investment products and Insurance
11. Transactions undertaken for non-account holders (occasional Customers)
12. Provision of safe custody and safety deposit boxes
13. Currency exchange transactions
14. Project financing of sensitive industries in high-risk jurisdictions
15. Trade finance services and transactions involving high-risk jurisdictions
16. Services offering anonymity or involving third parties
17. Services involving banknote and precious metal trading and delivery
18. Services offering cash, monetary or bearer instruments;
19. Cross-border transactions, etc.
APPENDIX – C
High / Medium Risk Geographic risk
Branches / offices are required to prepare a profile for all new customers based on risk categorization, taking
into account the location of the customer and the customer’s clients as well as factors such as the nature of
business activity, mode of payments, turnover and customer’s social and financial status including location of
his business activity and to exercise due diligence based on the bank’s risk perception. The customer should
be subjected to higher due diligence if following criteria falls under “high-risk” geographies
 Country of nationality (individuals)
 Country of residential address (individuals)
 Country of incorporation (legal entities)
 Country of residence of principal shareholders / beneficial owners (legal entities)
 Country of business registration such as branch / liaison / project office
 Country of source of funds
 Country of the business or correspondence address
 Country with whom customer deals (e.g. 50% of business – trade, etc.)
Apart from the risk categorization of the countries, branches / offices should categorize the geographies /
locations within the country on both Money Laundering (ML) and Financing Terrorism (FT) risk.
Indicative List of High / Medium Risk Geographies
A. Countries / Jurisdictions
1. Countries subject to sanctions, embargos or similar measures in the United Nations Security Council
Resolutions (“UNSCR”).
2. Jurisdictions identified in FATF public statement as having substantial money laundering and
terrorist financing (ML/FT) risks (www.fatf-gafi.org).
3. Jurisdictions identified in FATF public statement with strategic AML/CFT deficiencies
4. Tax havens or countries those are known for highly secretive banking and corporate law
practices.
5. Countries identified by credible Sources as lacking appropriate AML/CFT laws, regulations and other
measures.
6. Countries identified by credible sources as providing funding or support for terrorist activities that
have designated terrorist organizations operating within them.
7. Countries identified by credible sources as having significant levels of criminal activity.
8. Countries identified by the bank as high-risk because of its prior experiences, transaction history,
or other factors (e.g. legal considerations, or allegations of official corruption).
B. Locations
1. Locations within the country known as high risk for terrorist incidents or terrorist financing
activities (e.g. sensitive locations / cities and affected districts)
2. Locations identified by credible sources as having significant levels of criminal, terrorist,
terrorist financing activity.
3. Locations identified by the bank as high-risk because of its prior experiences, transaction history,
or other factors.
High risk countries / jurisdictions or locations
Iran Albania Kuwait Sudan
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Lao PDR Syria
(DPRK) Angola
Algeria Argentina Namibia Tajikistan
Ecuador Cambodia Nicaragua Turkey
Indonesia Cuba Pakistan Uganda
Myanmar Ethiopia Panama Yemen
Afghanistan Iraq Papua New Guinea Zimbabwe
NOTE:
Risk assessment should take into account following risk variables specific to a particular customer or
transaction:
 The purpose of an account or relationship
 Level of assets to be deposited by a particular customer or the size of transaction undertaken.
 Level of regulation or other oversight or governance regime to which a customer is subjected to.
 The regularity or duration of the relationship.
 Familiarity with a country, including knowledge of local laws, regulations and rules as well as
structure and extent of regulatory oversight.
 The use of intermediate corporate vehicles or other structures that have no apparent commercial or
other rationale or increase the complexity or otherwise result in lack of transparency
ANNEX – IV
Monitoring / Review of Customer Risk Categorization (CRC)
Customer Behavior Indicators which may lead to migration of Risk categorization to “High Risk” are as
follows:
 Customers who are reluctant in providing normal information while opening an account, providing
minimal or fictitious information or when applying to open an account, providing information that is
difficult or expensive for the Bank to verify.
 Customer expressing unusual curiosity about secrecy of information involved in the transaction.
 Customers who decline to provide information that in normal circumstance would make the
customers eligible for banking services.
 Customer giving confusing details about a transaction.
 Customer reluctant or refuses to state a purpose of a particular large / complex transaction /
source of funds involved or provides a questionable purpose and / or source.
 Customers who use separate tellers to conduct cash transactions or foreign exchange transactions.
 Customers who deposit cash / withdrawals by means of numerous deposit slips / cheques leaves
so that the total of each deposit is unremarkable, but the total of all credits / debits is significant.
 Customers’ representatives avoiding contact with the branch.
 Customer who repays the problem loans unexpectedly.
 Customers who appear to have accounts with several banks within the same locality without any
apparent logical reason.
 Customer seeks to change or cancel a transaction after the customer is informed of currency
transaction reporting / information verification or record keeping requirements relevant to the
transaction.
 Customers regularly issue large value cheques without balance and then deposits cash.
 Sudden transfer of funds from unrelated accounts through internet (or such other electronic
channels) and subsequent quick withdrawal through ATM.
A. Transactions involving large amounts of cash
 Exchanging an unusually large amount of small denomination notes for those of higher
denomination.
 Purchasing or selling of foreign currencies in substantial amounts by cash settlement despite the
customer having an account with the bank.
 Frequent withdrawal of large amounts by means of cheques, including traveler‘s cheques.
 Frequent withdrawal of large cash amounts that do not appear to be justified by the customer‘s
business activity.
 Large cash withdrawals from a previously dormant / inactive account, or from an account which
has just received an unexpected large credit from abroad.
 Company transactions, both deposits and withdrawals that are denominated by unusually large
amounts of cash rather than by way of debits and credits normally associated with the normal
commercial operations of the company e.g. cheques, letters of credit, bills of exchange etc.
 Depositing cash by means of numerous credit slips by a customer, such that the amount of each
deposit is not substantial, but the total of which is substantial.
B. Transactions that do not make Economic Sense
 Customer having multiple accounts with the bank, with frequent transfers between different
accounts.
 Transactions in which amounts are withdrawn immediately after being deposited, unless the
customer‘s business activities furnish plausible reasons for immediate withdrawal.
C. Activities not consistent with the customer’s business
 Corporate accounts where deposits or withdrawals are primarily in cash rather than cheques.
 Corporate accounts where deposits and withdrawals by cheque / telegraphic transfers/ foreign
inward remittances/ any other means are received from / made to sources apparently
unconnected with the corporate business activity / dealings.
 Unusual applications for DD / PO / NEFT/ RTGS against cash.
 Accounts with large volume of credits through DD / PO / NEFT / RTGS whereas the nature of
business does not justify such credits.
 Retail deposit of many cheques but rare withdrawals for daily operations.
D. Attempts to avoid reporting / record- keep requirements
 A customer who is reluctant to provide information needed for a mandatory report, to have the
report filed or to proceed with a transaction after being informed that the report must be filed.
 Any individual or group that coerces / induces or attempts to coerce/ induce a bank employee not
to file any reports or any other forms.
 An account where there are several cash deposits /withdrawals below a specified threshold level
to avoid filing of reports that may be necessary in case of transactions above the threshold level,
as the customers intentionally splits the transaction into smaller amounts for the purpose of
avoiding the threshold limit.
E. Unusual Activities
 An account of a customer who does not reside / have office near the branch even though there
are bank branches near his residence / office.
 A customer who often visits the safe deposit area immediately before making cash deposits,
especially deposits just under the threshold level.
 Funds coming from the list of countries / centres, which are known for money laundering.
F. Customer who provides insufficient or suspicious information
 A customer / company who is reluctant to provide complete information regarding the purpose
of the business, prior banking relationships, officers or directors or its locations.
 A customer / company who is reluctant to reveal details about his/its activities or to provide
financial statements
 A customer who has no record of past or present employment but makes frequent large
transactions.
G. Certain suspicious funds transfer activities
 Sending or receiving frequent or large volumes of remittances to/from countries outside India.
 Receiving large DD/ NEFT/ RTGS remittances from various centres and remitting the consolidated
amount to a different account / centre on the same day leaving a minimum balance in the account.
 Maintaining multiple accounts, transferring money among the accounts and using one account as a
master account for wire / fund transfer.
H. Bank no longer knows the true identity
When a bank believes that it would no longer be satisfied that it knows the true identity of the account holder.
I. Some examples of suspicious activities / transactions to be monitored by the operating staff
 Large Cash Transactions
 Multiple accounts under the same name
 Frequently converting large amounts of currency from small to large denomination notes
 
immediately followed by wire transfers.
 Sudden surge in activity level.
 Same funds being moved repeatedly among several accounts.
 Multiple deposits of money orders, Banker's cheques, drafts of third Parties Multiple deposits
of Banker's cheques, demand drafts, cross / bearer.
 Cheques of third parties into the account followed by immediate cash withdrawals.
 Transactions inconsistent with the purpose of the account.
 Maintaining a low or overdrawn balance with high activity
J. Check list for preventing money-laundering activities
 A customer maintains multiple accounts, transfers money among the accounts and uses one
account as a master account from which wire / funds transfer originates or into which wire / funds transfer are
received (a customer deposits funds in several accounts, usually in amounts below a specified threshold and
the funds are then consolidated into one master account and wired outside the country).
 A customer regularly depositing or withdrawing large amounts by a wire transfer to, from, or
through countries that are known sources of narcotics or where Bank secrecy laws facilitate
laundering money.
 A customer sends and receives wire transfers (from financial haven countries) particularly if
there is no apparent business reason for such transfers and is not consistent with the customer's
business or history.
 A customer receiving many small incoming wire transfer of funds or deposits of cheques and
money orders, then orders large outgoing wire transfers to another city or country.
 A customer experiences increased wire activity when previously there has been no regular wire
activity.
 Loan proceeds unexpectedly are wired or mailed to an offshore Bank or third party.
 A business customer uses or evidences or sudden increase in wire transfer to send and receive
large amounts of money, internationally and/ or domestically and such transfers are not
consistent with the customer's history.
 Deposits of currency or monetary instruments into the account of a domestic trade or business,
which in turn are quickly wire transferred abroad or moved among other accounts for no particular
business purpose.
 Sending or receiving frequent or large volumes of wire transfers to and from offshore institutions.
 Instructing the Bank to transfer funds abroad and to expect an equal incoming wire Transfer from
other sources.
 Wiring cash or proceeds of a cash deposit to another country without changing the form of the
currency
 Receiving wire transfers and immediately purchasing monetary instruments prepared for payment
to a third party.
 Periodic wire transfers from a person's account (s) to Bank haven countries.
 A customer pays for a large (international or domestic) wire transfers using multiple monetary
instruments drawn on several financial institutions.
 A customer or a non-customer receives incoming or makes outgoing wire transfers involving
currency amounts just below a specified threshold, or that involve numerous Bank or travelers’
cheques.
 A customer or a non-customer receives incoming wire transfers from the Bank to ‘Pay upon proper
identification’ or to convert the funds to bankers’ cheques and mail them to the customer or non-
customer, when the amount is very large (say over Rs. 10 Lakh).
a. The amount is just under a specified threshold.
b. The funds come from a foreign country or
c. Such transactions occur repeatedly.
 A customer or a non-customer arranges large wire transfers out of the country which are paid for
by multiple Bankers' cheques (just under a specified threshold).
 A Non-customer sends numerous wire transfers using currency amounts just below a specified
threshold limit
ANNEX – V
KYC documents for eligible FPIs under PIS
FPI Type
Category
Document Type Category I Category II
III
Entity Level Constitutive Documents Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory
(Memorandum and Articles
of Association, Certificate of
Incorporation etc.)
Proof of Address Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory
other than
(Power of (Power of Attorney
Power of
Attorney {PoA} mentioning the
Attorney
mentioning the address is
address is acceptable as
acceptable as address proof)
address proof)
PAN Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory
Financial Data Exempted * Exempted * Mandatory
SEBI Registration Certificate Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory
Board Resolution @ Exempted * Mandatory Mandatory
Senior List Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory
Management Proof of Identity Exempted * Exempted * Entity
(Whole Time declares* on
Directors / letter head full
Partners / name,
Trustees / etc.) nationality,
date of birth or
submits
photo identity
proof
Proof of Address Exempted * Exempted * Declaration
on Letter
Head*
Photographs Exempted Exempted Exempted *
Authorized List and Signatures Mandatory – list Mandatory - list of Mandatory
of Global Global Custodian
Signatories
Custodian signatories can be
signatories can be
FPI Type
Category
Document Type Category I Category II
III
given in case of given in case of PoA
PoA to Global to Global Custodian
Custodian
Proof of Identity Exempted * Exempted * Mandatory
Proof of Address Exempted * Exempted * Declaration on
Letter Head *
Photographs Exempted Exempted Exempted *
Ultimate List Exempted * Mandatory (can Mandatory
Beneficial Owner declare “no
(UBO) UBO over 25%”)
Proof of Identity Exempted * Exempted * Mandatory
Proof of Address Exempted * Exempted * Declaration on
Letter Head *
Photographs Exempted Exempted Exempted *
*Not required while opening the bank account. However, FPIs concerned may submit an undertaking that
upon demand by Regulators/Law Enforcement Agencies the relative document/s would be submitted to the
bank.
@ FPIs from certain jurisdictions where the practice of passing Board Resolution for the purpose of opening
bank accounts etc. is not in vogue, may submit ‘Power of Attorney granted to Global Custodian/Local
Custodian In lieu of Board Resolution’
Category Eligible Foreign Investors
I. Government and Government related foreign investors such as Foreign Central Banks,
Governmental Agencies, Sovereign Wealth Funds, International/ Multilateral
Organizations/ Agencies.
II. a) Appropriately regulated broad based funds such as Mutual Funds, Investment
Trusts, Insurance /Reinsurance Companies, Other Broad Based Funds etc.
b) Appropriately regulated entities such as Banks, Asset Management Companies,
Investment Managers/ Advisors, Portfolio Managers etc.
c) Broad based funds whose investment manager is appropriately regulated.
d) University Funds and Pension Funds.
e) University related Endowments already registered with SEBI as FII /Sub Account.
III. All other eligible foreign investors investing in India under PIS route not eligible under
Category I and II such as Endowments, Charitable Societies/Trust, Foundations,
Corporate Bodies, Trusts, Individuals, Family Offices, etc.
ANNEX – VI
Procedure for implementation of Section 51A of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.
Section 51A of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA) reads as under:- "51A. For the
prevention of, and for coping with terrorist activities, the Central Government shall have power to —
a) freeze, seize or attach funds and other financial assets or economic resources held by, on behalf
of or at the direction of the individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order, or any other person
engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;
b) prohibit any individual or entity from making any funds, financial assets or economic resources or
related services available for the benefit of the individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order or
any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;
c) Prevent the entry into or the transit through India of individuals listed in the Schedule to the
Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism".
In order to ensure expeditious and effective implementation of the provisions of Section 51A, a revised
procedure of orders and guidelines on the subject:
1. Communication details of the UAPA Nodal Officers:
The Additional Secretary (CTCR), Ministry of Home Affairs, would be the Central [designated] Nodal
Officer for the UAPA at Fax No. 011-230923465 and also convey over telephone on 011-23092456.
2. Communication of the list of designated individuals / entities
a. The Ministry of External Affairs shall update the list of individuals and entities subject to the UN
sanction measures whenever changes are made in the lists by the UNSC 1267
Committee pertaining to Al Qaida and Da’esh and the UNSC 1988 Committee pertaining to Taliban. On
such revisions, the Ministry of External Affairs would electronically forward the changes without delay to
the designated Nodal Officers in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, CBIC, Financial Regulators, FIU–IND,
CTCR Division and Foreigners Division in MHA.
b. The Financial Regulators shall forward the list of designated persons as mentioned in Para 2.1
above, without delay to the banks, stock exchanges / depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and
insurance companies.
c. The Central Nodal Officer for the UAPA shall forward the designated list as mentioned in Para
above, to all the UAPA Nodal Officers of States/UTs without delay.
d. The UAPA Nodal Officer in Foreigners Division of MHA shall forward the designated list as
mentioned in Para 2.1 above, to the immigration authorities and security agencies without delay.
3. Regarding funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services held in the form of
bank accounts, stocks or insurance policies etc.
a. The Financial Regulators will issue necessary guidelines to banks, stock exchanges/depositories,
intermediaries regulated by the SEBI and insurance companies requiring them –
i. To maintain updated designated lists in electronic form and run a check on the given parameters
on a daily basis to verify whether individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order, hereinafter,
referred to as designated individuals / entities are holding any funds, financial assets or economic
resources or related services held in the form of bank accounts, stocks, Insurance policies etc., with
them.
ii. In case, the particulars of any of their customers match with the particulars of designated
individuals / entities, the banks, stock exchanges / depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI,
insurance companies shall immediately inform full particulars of the funds, financial assets or economic
resources or related services held in the form of bank accounts, stocks or Insurance policies etc., held by
such customer on their books to the Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA, at Fax No. 011-
23092551 and also convey over telephone No. 011-23092548.
iii. The banks, stock exchanges/depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and insurance
companies shall also send a copy of the communication mentioned in 3.1 (ii) above to the UAPA Nodal
Officer of the State/UT where the account is held and to Regulators and FIU-IND, as the case may be,
without delay.
iv. In case, the match of any of the customers with the particulars of designated individuals /
entities is beyond doubt, the banks, stock exchanges / depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and
insurance companies shall prevent such designated persons from conducting financial transactions,
under intimation to the Central Nodal Officer for the UAPA at Fax No. 011-23092551 and also convey over
telephone No. 011-23092548.
v. The banks, stock exchanges / depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI, and insurance
companies shall file a Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) with FIU-IND covering all transactions in the
accounts, covered under Paragraph 3.1(ii) above, carried through or attempted as per the prescribed
format.
b. On receipt of the particulars, as referred to in Paragraph 3 (i) above, the Central [designated]
Nodal Officer for the UAPA would cause a verification to be conducted by the State Police and / or the
Central Agencies so as to ensure that the individuals / entities identified by the banks, stock exchanges /
depositories, intermediaries and insurance companies are the ones listed as designated individuals /
entities and the funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services, reported by banks,
stock exchanges / depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and insurance companies are held by
the designated individuals / entities. This verification would be completed expeditiously from the date of
receipt of such particulars.
c. In case, the results of the verification indicate that the properties are owned by or are held for the
benefit of the designated individuals / entities, an orders to freeze these assets under Section 51A of the
UAPA would be issued by the Central [designated] nodal officer for the UAPA without delay and conveyed
electronically to the concerned bank branch, depository and insurance company under
intimation to respective Regulators and FIU-IND. The Central [designated] nodal officer for the UAPA
shall also forward a copy thereof to all the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries, Home Department of the
States / UTs and all UAPA nodal officers in the country, so that any individual or entity may be prohibited
from making any funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services available for the benefit
of the designated individuals/ entities or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in
terrorism. The Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA shall also forward a copy of the order to all
Directors General of Police/ Commissioners of Police of all States/UTs for initiating action under the
provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
The order shall be issued without prior notice to the designated individual / entity.
4. Regarding financial assets or economic resources of the nature of immovable properties.
a. The Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA shall electronically forward the designated
list to the UAPA Nodal Officers of all States and UTs with request to have the names of the designated
individuals/entities, on the given parameters, verified from the records of the office of the Registrar
performing the work of registration of immovable properties in their respective jurisdiction, without
delay.
b. In case, the designated individuals/entities are holding financial assets or economic resources of
the nature of immovable property and if any match with the designated individuals/entities is found, the
UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT would cause communication of the complete particulars of such
individual/entity along with complete details of the financial assets or economic resources of the nature
of immovable property to the Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA without delay at Fax No.
011-23092551 and also convey over telephone No. 011-23092548.
c. The UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT may cause such inquiry to be conducted by the State
Police so as to ensure that the particulars sent by the Registrar performing the work of registering
immovable properties are indeed of these designated individuals/entities. This verification shall be
completed without delay and shall be conveyed within 24 hours of the verification, if it matches with the
particulars of the designated individual/entity to the Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA at
the given Fax, telephone numbers and also on the email id.
d. The Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA may also have the verification conducted by
the Central Agencies. This verification would be completed expeditiously.
e. In case, the results of the verification indicates that the particulars match with those of
designated individuals/entities, an order under Section 51A of the UAPA shall be issued by the Central
[designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA without delay and conveyed to the concerned Registrar
performing the work of registering immovable properties and to FIU-IND under intimation to the
concerned UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT. The order shall be issued without prior notice to the
designated individual/entity.
f. Further, the UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT shall cause to monitor the transactions/
accounts of the designated individual/entity so as to prohibit any individual or entity from making any
funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services available for the benefit of the
individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order or any other person engaged in or suspected
to be engaged in terrorism. The UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT shall, upon becoming aware of any
transactions and attempts by third party immediately bring to the notice of the DGP/Commissioner of
Police of the State/UT for initiating action under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
1967.
5. Implementation of requests received from foreign countries under U.N. Security Council
Resolution 1373 of 2001.
a. The U.N. Security Council Resolution No. 1373 of 2001 obligates countries to freeze without
delay the funds or other assets of persons who commit, or attempt to commit, terrorist acts or
participate in or facilitate the commission of terrorist acts; of entities owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such persons; and of persons and entities acting on behalf of, or at the direction of such
persons and entities, including funds or other assets derived or generated from property owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by such persons and associated persons and entities. Each individual
country has the authority to designate the persons and entities that should have their funds or other
assets frozen.
Additionally, to ensure that effective cooperation is developed among countries, countries should
examine and give effect to, if appropriate, the actions initiated under the freezing mechanisms of other
countries.
b. To give effect to the requests of foreign countries under the U.N. Security Council Resolution
1373, the Ministry of External Affairs shall examine the requests made by the foreign countries and
forward it electronically, with their comments, to the Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA for
freezing of funds or other assets.
c. The Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA shall cause the request to be examined
without delay, so as to satisfy itself that on the basis of applicable legal principles, the requested
designation is supported by reasonable grounds, or a reasonable basis, to suspect or believe that the
proposed designee is a terrorist, one who finances terrorism or a terrorist organization, and upon his
satisfaction, request would be electronically forwarded to the Nodal Officers in Regulators, FIU-IND and
to the Nodal Officers of the States/UTs. The proposed designee, as mentioned above would be treated as
designated individuals/entities. 6. Upon receipt of the requests by these Nodal Officers from the
Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA, the similar procedure as enumerated at paragraphs 3
and 4 above shall be followed.
The freezing orders shall be issued without prior notice to the designated persons involved.
7. Regarding exemption, to be granted to the above orders in accordance with UNSCR 1452.
a. The above provisions shall not apply to funds and other financial assets or economic resources
that have been determined by the Central [designated] nodal officer of the UAPA to be:-
(a) necessary for basic expenses, including payments for foodstuff, rent or mortgage, medicines and
medical treatment, taxes, insurance premiums and public utility charges, or exclusively for payment of
reasonable professional fees and reimbursement of incurred expenses associated with the provision of
legal services or fees or service charges for routine holding or maintenance of frozen funds or other
financial assets or economic resources, after notification by the MEA of the intention to authorize, where
appropriate, access to such funds,
assets or resources and in the absence of a negative decision within 48 hours of such notification;
(b) necessary for extraordinary expenses, provided that such determination has been notified by the
MEA;
b. The addition may be allowed to accounts of the designated individuals/ entities subject to the
provisions of paragraph 7 of:
a. interest or other earnings due on those accounts, or
b. payments due under contracts, agreements or obligations that arose prior to the date on which
those accounts became subject to the provisions Provided that any such interest, other earnings and
payments continue to be subject to those provisions;
8. Procedure for unfreezing of funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services of
individuals/entities inadvertently affected by the freezing mechanism upon verification that the
person or entity is not a designated person:
a. Any individual or entity, if it has evidence to prove that the freezing of funds, financial assets or
economic resources or related services, owned/held by them has been inadvertently frozen, they shall
move an application giving the requisite evidence, in writing, to the concerned bank, Registrar of
Immovable Properties and the State/UT nodal officers.
b. The banks, Registrar of Immovable Properties and the State/UT nodal officers shall inform and
forward a copy of the application together with full details of the asset frozen given by any individual or
entity informing of the funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services have been frozen
inadvertently, to the nodal officer of CTCR Division of MHA as per the contact details given in paragraph
1(ii) above within two working days.
c. The Central [designated] Nodal Officer for the UAPA shall cause such verification, as may be
required on the basis of the evidence furnished by the individual/entity, and, if satisfied, he/she shall pass
an order, without delay, unfreezing the funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services,
owned/held by such applicant, under intimation to the concerned bank, stock exchanges/depositories,
intermediaries regulated by SEBI, insurance company, Registrar of Immovable Properties, ROC,
Regulators of DNFBPs and the UAPA Nodal Officer of State/UT. However, if it is not possible for any reason
to pass an Order unfreezing the assets within 5 working days, the Central [designated] Nodal Officer for
the UAPA shall inform the applicant expeditiously.
9. Regarding prevention of entry into or transit through India
a. As regards prevention of entry into or transit through India of the designated individuals, the
Foreigners Division of MHA, shall forward the designated lists to the immigration authorities and security
agencies with a request to prevent the entry into or the transit through India. The order shall take place
without prior notice to the designated individuals / entities.
b. The immigration authorities shall ensure strict compliance of the Orders and also communicate
the details of entry or transit through India of the designated individuals as prevented by them to the
Foreigners' Division of MHA.
10. Procedure for communication of compliance of action taken under Section 51 A.
The Central Nodal Officers for the UAPA and the Nodal Officer in the Foreigners Division of MHA shall
furnish the details of funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services of designated
individuals / entities frozen by an order, and details of the individuals whose entry into India or transit
through India was prevented, respectively, to the Ministry of External Affairs for onward communication to
the United Nations.
11. Communication of Order issued under Section 51A of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967:
All Orders under section 51A of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 relating to funds, financial assets
or economic resources or related services, shall be communicated to all banks, Regulators of Financial
Services, FIU-IND and DNFBPs, depositories / stock exchanges, intermediaries regulated by SEBI, Registrars
performing the work of registering immovable properties, through the UAPA nodal officer of the State/UT
END