About Financial Intelligence Unit-India The client due diligence (CDD) has to be done at the time  Private Indian Banks and Private Foreign Banks
of opening of an account as well as periodically during the  Primary, District and State Co-operative Banks
Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND) is the central tenure of the business relationship.  Regional Rural Banks
national agency for receiving, processing, analysing and
disseminating information relating to suspect financial Maintenance of records and furnishing of reports to FIU- Financial Institutions
transactions. FIU-IND is also responsible for coordinating IND
and strengthening efforts of national and international  Financial I institutions as defined in Section 45-1 of
intelligence, investigation and enforcement agencies in The following transactions have been specified under the the RBI Act
combating money laundering, associated predicate PML Rules for which records have to be maintained and  Insurance Companies
offences and terrorist financing. It is an independent body reports are to be furnished to FIU-IND:  Hire-Purchase Companies
reporting to the Economic Intelligence Council (EIC)  Chit Fund Companies
headed by the Finance Minister. (a) All cash transactions of the value of more than  Housing Finance Companies
rupees 10 lakh or its equivalent in foreign currency.  Non-Banking Financial Companies
Core functions of FIU-IND (b) All series of cash transactions integrally connected  Payment System Operators (Credit Cards)
to each other which have been individually valued  Authorized persons (Money changers)
Intelligence Management below rupees ten lakhs or its equivalent in foreign  India Post
currency where such series of transactions have
Maintaining national database of Cash Transaction taken place within a month and the monthly Intermediaries
Reports (CTRs), Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs), aggregate exceeds an amount of ten lakh rupees
Counterfeit Currency Reports (CCRs), NPO Sector or its equivalent in foreign currency;
Transaction Report (NTR) and Cross Border Wire All entities registered under section 12 of the SEBI Act
Transfer Report (CBTR) received from the reporting (c) All transactions involving receipts by non - including:
entities under the provisions of the Prevention of profit organisations of value more than rupees ten  Stock Brokers and Sub-brokers
Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA). lakh, or its equivalent in foreign currency;  Share Transfer Agents and Registrars to
Conducting operational and strategic analysis of the issue
statutory reports received.  Bankers to an Issue and Merchant Bankers
Screening and processing requests for information from (d) All cash transactions where forged or Underwriters
domestic law enforcement & intelligence agencies and counterfeit currency notes or bank notes have  Trustees to Trust Deed
from foreign FIUs. been used as genuine or where any forgery of a  Portfolio Managers and Investment
Disseminating actionable intelligence to domestic law valuable security or a document has taken place Advisers
enforcement & intelligence agencies and to foreign FIUs. facilitating the transactions;  Depositories and Depository Participants
Custodians of Securities
Strategic Management (e) All suspicious transactions, whether or not  Foreign Institutional Investors
made in cash, including attempted transactions.  Credit Rating Agencies
 Venture Capital Funds
Reviewing operational and regulatory issues and
suggesting policy changes to counter money-laundering, (f) All cross border wire transfers of the value of more  Collective Investment Schemes including Mutual
associated predicate offences and terrorist financing. than five lakh rupees or its equivalent in foreign Funds
Promoting awareness on issues relating to money currency where either the origin or destination of  Intermediaries regulated by Forward Market
Commission (FMC)
laundering and terrorist financing. fund is in India;
 Intermediaries regulated by Pension Fund
Building capacities in the financial sector for effective
Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA)
identification and reporting of prescribed transactions.
(g) All purchase and sale by any person of
immovable property valued at fifty lakh rupees or
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
more that is registered by the reporting entity.
The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) is
the principal legislation by which the legal and The Suspicious Transaction Report mentioned at para (e)
institutional framework for combating money laundering above should be furnished within seven working days
and terrorist financing has been created. PMLA and the on being satisfied that the transaction is suspicious. The
Rules notified thereunder came into force w.e.f. 1st July, information in respect of immoveable property
2005. transactions referred to in (g) above should be
furnished to FIU-IND every quarter by the 15th day of
the month succeeding the quarter.
Under section 3 of the PMLA, attempting or knowingly
indulging in any process or activity connected with
proceeds of crime including its concealment, possession, All other reports need to be furnished on a monthly
acquisition or use and projecting or claiming it as basis by the 15th day of the succeeding month.
untainted property is chargeable with the offence of
money-laundering. Suspicious Transaction:
Obligations of Reporting Entities under PMLA Suspicious Transaction means a transaction (including
an attempted transaction) whether or
Under PMLA, every reporting entity (banking company, not made in cash which, to a person acting in good faith:
financial institution, intermediary or person carrying on
designated business and profession) is required to appoint a) gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that
a Principal Officer and a Designated Director and it may involve the proceeds of crime; or
communicate their names, designations and addresses to b) appears to be made in circumstances of unusual
FIU-IND. The reporting entity is also obligated to client due or unjustified complexity; or
diligence, maintain record of specified transactions for the c) appears to have no economic rationale or bona
prescribed period and furnish report of the prescribed fide purpose; or
transactions to FIU-IND. d) gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that
it may involve financing of activities relating to
Client Due Diligence terrorism.
The reporting entity is required to (i) identify its clients,
verify their identity, obtain information on the purpose Reporting Entities
and intended nature of the business relationship (ii) to
determine whether a client is acting on behalf of a Banking Companies
beneficial owner, and (iii) identify the beneficial owner
and take all steps to verify the identity of the beneficial  Nationalized banks
owner.  State Bank of India and its Associates
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) The terms “Managing Director” and “Whole-time Director”
have the same meaning as assigned to them in the
1.What is Money Laundering? Companies Act, 1956.
Money Laundering involves disguising financial 8. In what form the records identity of clients and
assets so that they can be used without detection of transactions required to be maintained?
the illegal activity that produced them. Through
money laundering, the launderer transforms the Records have to be maintained both in hard and
monetary proceeds derived from criminal activity soft copies in the manner as prescribed from time to time
into funds with an apparently legal source. by RBI, SEBI, IRDA or the sector regulator, as the case may
be.
2.What is a Money Laundering offence?
9. When should the verification of identity of
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE UNIT-INDIA
Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to clients be undertaken?
indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party
or is actually involved in any process or activity Verification has to be undertaken at the time of
connected with the proceeds of crime and starting an account-based relationship as well as while
projecting it as untainted property shall be guilty of executing any transaction with a client.
an offence of money laundering.
10. What is the fine for not complying with the
3.What are Proceeds of crime? obligations under PMLA?
"Proceeds of crime" means any property derived Director, FTU-IND can impose a range of sanctions on the
or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person as reporting entity for non-compliance including monetary
a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled penalty ranging from Rs.10,000/- to Rs.1,00,000/- for
offence or the value of any such property. each failure.
4.'What are Scheduled offences? 11. What are the powers of Director, FIU-IND
under Section 13 of PMLA?
Scheduled offences means the offences specified
under Part A and Part C of the Schedule to PMLA. Section 13 empowers Director, FIU-IND to make enquiry
and impose fine in required cases. For the purposes of
5.What does FIU·IND do with the information section 13, Director, FIU-
received by it? IND has the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
FIU-IND processes and analyses financial
information and disseminates actionable 12. Whether any civil or criminal proceedings can be
intelligence in appropriate cases to relevant law initiated against the reporting entity for furnishing
enforcement and intelligence agencies. information to FIU-IND? Obligations of Entities in
Financial Sector
6.Who is a Principal Officer? As per section 14 of the PMLA, the reporting entity, its
directors and employees shall not be liable to any civil
under
Principal Officer is an officer designated by a or criminal proceedings for furnishing information to FIU-
reporting entity for the purpose of Section 12 of IND.
PMLA. Rule 7 of the PML Rules requires every reporting The Prevention of Money
entity to communicate the name, designation and address 13. What is the manner for furnishing of specified Laundering Act, 2002
of information to FIU-IND?
the Principal Officer to the Director, FIU-IND.
The specified information is required to be filed online on
7. Who is a Designated Director? the FINnet Gateway Portal (https://finnet.gov.in/) after
registering the reporting entity and the Principal Officer.
“Designated Director” means a person designated by the The pre-requisites and technical help for accessing FINnet
reporting entity to ensure overall compliance with the Portal are available at the website of FIU-IND and can be Version 2.0
obligations imposed under the PML Act and the PML Rules accessed by following the link :
and includes – http://fiuindia.gov.in/downloads/FINNET_TechnicalHelp.pdf
(i) the Managing Director or a whole-time Director if
Address
the reporting entity is a company,
(ii) the managing partner if the reporting entity is a Financial Intelligence Unit-India
partnership firm, Ministry of Finance, Government of India
(iii) the proprietor if the reporting entity is a 6th Floor, Hotel Samrat, Kautilya Marg.
proprietorship concern, Chanakyapuri
New Delhi· 110 021, India
(iv) the managing trustee if the reporting entity is a
trust,
Email
(v) a person or individual who controls and manages the feedbk@fiuindia.gov.in (For feedback)
affairs of the reporting entity if the reporting entity is an helpdesk@fiuindia.gov.in (For queries relating to
unincorporated association or a body of individuals, and online filing of reports)
(vi) such other person or class of persons as may be
Website
notified by the Government if the reporting entity does
not fall in any of the categories above.
http://fiuindia.gov.in