KNOW YOUR CUSTOMER (KYC) AND PREVENTION OF MONEY
LAUNDERING POLICY
Version Control
Version Number Description Date
Version 0.1 Modification of existing Policy Aug 2019
Version 0.2 Amendment July 2020
Version 0.3 Renewal July 2021
Version 0.4 Renewal July 2022
Version 0.5 Renewal July 2023
Version 0.6 Renewal Oct 2024
Effective Date 05th October 2024
Next Review Date October 2025
Policy Owner Operations Department
Prepared By Operations Department
Reviewed by Policy Review Committee
Approved By Board of Directors
Point Content Page
No No
1 Introduction 3
2 Policy Statement 3
3 Objectives of the Policy 3
4 Scope of the Policy 4
5 Important Definitions 5
6 Key Elements of the Policy 10
6.1 Customer Acceptance Policy (CAP) 11
6.2 Customer Identification Procedure (CIP) 12
6.2.1 Video Based Customer Identification Process (V-CIP) 12
6.3 Customer Due Diligence Procedure (CDD) in case of individuals 14
6.3.1 Offline Verification Through Proof of Possession of Aadhaar Number 15
6.3.2 Accounts opened using Aadhaar OTP based e-KYC, in non-face-to-face mode 15
6.3.3 Verification Through Digital KYC 15
Page 1 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
6.3.4 Verification of Equivalent E-document 15
Page 2 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
6.4 Identification of Beneficial Owner 15
6.5 CDD Measures in Respect of Non-individuals 16
7 Customer Due Diligence By Third Party 16
8 Simplified Procedures For Small Value Loans 17
9 Selling Third Party Products 17
10 Issuance Of Prepaid Payment Instruments (PPI) 18
11 Monitoring of Transactions 18
12 Ongoing Due Diligence 19
13 Periodic Updation 19
14 Existing Customers 21
15 Risk Management 21
16 Risk Assessment 22
17 A Enhanced Due Diligence 22
17.1 Accounts of Politically Exposed Persons (PEP) 23
17.2 Accounts of Non face-to-face Customers 24
17.3 Enhanced Due Diligence (EDD) for non-face-to-face customer onboarding 24
(other than customer onboarding in terms of Section 17)
17.4 Client Accounts Opened by Professional Intermediaries 24
17.5 Clients of Special Category (CSC) 25
17.6 Simplified KYC norms for Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) 25
18 Confidentiality of Information About Customers 26
19 Maintenance of Records of Transactions 26
20 General 27
20.1 Adherence to KYC Guidelines by Agents/Brokers or the Like 27
20.2 Principal Officer 27
20.3 Designated Director 27
20.4 Staff and management responsibilities – Offence of Money Laundering 28
20.5 CDD Procedure and Sharing KYC information with Central KYC Records Registry 28
(CKYCR)
20.6 Training Programme 29
21 Compliance with Policy Norms 29
22 Other Operating Instructions 29
23 Wire Transfer 29
24 Obligations under Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and their Delivery Systems 33
(Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 (WMD Act, 2005)
Annexure – I 35
Annexure – II 38
Annexure – III 39
Annexure – IV 41
Annexure – V 42
Page 3 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
1. INTRODUCTION
In accordance with the Master Directions issued (as amended from time to time) by
Reserve Bank of India, all Regulated Entities (REs) including Manappuram Finance Limited
(MAFIL) is required to put in place appropriate Policy and procedures to comply with the
relevant Know Your Customer (KYC) norms and Customer Due Diligence (CDD) processes
at the time of onboarding the Customer and also during the continued relationship with such
Customer which includes monitoring of transactions in terms of the provisions of Prevention
of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 and the Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of
Records) Rules, 2005, as amended from time to time by the Government of India as well
as the relevant norms as put out by SEBI which has also issued guidelines on AML
standards to be followed by market intermediaries viz Depository Participants, Asset
Management Companies etc. Accordingly, MAFIL puts in place the Policy, which is further
detailed below:
2. POLICY STATEMENT
MAFIL is primarily engaged in retail finance and by nature of its business operations, the
potential risks of money laundering, terrorist financing that it faces is relatively low. MAFIL
recognizes the importance of the AML programs and commits itself to inculcating a vigilant
culture in combating money laundering to the extent applicable to the firm. Accordingly, it
puts in place a detailed KYC & AML Policy and procedures hereunder in line with RBI
Directions and Prevention of the Money Laundering Act, 2002 / Rules as amended from
time to time as well that of the norms put out by the other relevant regulations that is
applicable to its business operations, for the time being in force. A group-wide policy against
money laundering and terror financing, including group-wide policies for sharing information
required for the purposes of client due diligence and money laundering and terror finance
risk management and such programmes shall include adequate safeguards on the
confidentiality and use of information exchanged, including safeguards to prevent tipping-
off, is implemented for the purpose of discharging obligations under the provisions of
Chapter IV of the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003).
3. OBJECTIVES OF THE POLICY:
The Policy seeks to achieve the following objectives.
● To provide a framework for how the company, in its process of conducting business
with Customers, will deal with the threat of money laundering and terrorism
financing.
● To prevent criminal elements from using Company for Money Laundering and
Terrorist Funding activities
● That all the staff are aware and receive training on the Anti Money laundering
legislation applicable to them, as well as to adhere to their responsibilities under
the regulations
● To put in place an effective system and procedure for Customer identification and
verifying its / his / her identity and residential address.
● To enable the Company to know and understand its Customers and their financial
dealings better which, in turn, would help the Company to manage risks prudently.
● To put in place appropriate controls for detection and reporting of suspicious
activities as envisaged under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and
in accordance with laid down procedures.
Page 4 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
● To comply with applicable laws and regulatory guidelines
4. SCOPE OF THE POLICY
This Policy applies to all employees of MAFIL and third-party agents engaged by it for
origination, fulfilment, collection, outsourcing agencies, etc. The Policy seeks to maintain
high standards of conduct within the Company and among its agents, if any, by preventing
criminal activity through money laundering. The Policy sets out the procedures which must
be followed (for example the reporting of suspicions of money laundering activity) to enable
the Company to comply with its legal obligations.
The legislation and Regulatory directives places responsibility upon MAFIL, its employees
and its agents to combat money laundering and covers a very wide area of financial
transactions, including possessing, or in any way dealing with, or concealing, the proceeds
of any crime. It applies to all employees involved with handling monetary transactions. It is
a criminal offence to, assist a money launderer, “tip off” a person suspected to be involved
in money laundering that they are suspected or that they are the subject of police
investigations, fail to report a suspicion of money laundering and acquire, use, or possess
criminal property.
The legislative requirements concerning anti-money laundering procedures are extensive
and complex. This Policy aims to meet the legal requirements proportionate to the intensity
of risks that MAFIL is exposed to in respect of the businesses/activities (business verticals)
being undertaken by the company as detailed below.
- Gold Loan including all types (online or offline)
- Vehicle and Equipment Finance
- Remittances
- Pre-paid Instruments.
- Depository Participant
- Money Changing
- All other businesses/products/services such as: -
a) Digital Personal Loan
b) Health Care Industry Loan
c) Micro Home Finance
d) MSME
e) Secured Personal Loan
f) Corporate Loans
g) Loan to Consumer Durables
h) Loan to Food Industry
i) Mahila Credit Loan
j) Micro Credit Loan
k) Restaurant Finance
l) School Finance
m) Small Scale Industrial Finance
n) Traders Micro Credit
Page 5 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
- Any other activities requiring on boarding of a customer, whether corporate or
otherwise, for the purpose of any one off or continued transactions.
- Anywhere applicable laws and regulations prohibit implementation of these
guidelines, the same shall be brought to the notice of the Reserve Bank of India.
RBI may advise further necessary action by the MAFIL including application of
additional measures to be taken to manage the money laundering or terror
funding risks.
This Policy shall be reviewed semi-annually by the Board of Directors.
5. IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS
(i) Beneficial Owner (BO)
a. Where the Customer is a company, the beneficial owner is the natural person(s),
who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical persons,
has/have a controlling ownership interest or who exercise control through other
means.
“Controlling ownership interest” means ownership of/entitlement to more than 10
per cent of the shares or capital or profits of the company.
“Control” shall include the right to appoint majority of the directors or to control the
management or Policy decisions including by virtue of their shareholding or
management rights or shareholder’s agreements or voting agreements.
b. Where the Customer is a partnership firm, the beneficial owner is the natural
person(s), who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical
person, has/have ownership of/entitlement to more than 10 per cent of capital or
profits of the partnership or who exercises control through other means.
Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-clause, “control” shall include the right to
control the management or policy decision.
c. Where the Customer is an unincorporated association or body of individuals, the
beneficial owner is the natural person(s), who, whether acting alone or together, or
through one or more juridical person, has/have ownership of/entitlement to more
than 15 per cent of the property or capital or profits of the unincorporated
association or body of individuals.
Explanation: Term ‘body of individuals’ includes societies. Where no natural person
is identified under (a), (b) or (c) above, the beneficial owner is the relevant natural
person who holds the position of senior managing official.
d. Where the Customer is a trust, the identification of beneficial owner(s) shall include
identification of the author of the trust, the trustee, the beneficiaries with 10% or
more interest in the trust and any other natural person exercising ultimate effective
control over the trust through a chain of control or ownership.
(ii) “Central KYC Records Registry” (CKYCR) means an entity defined under Rule 2(1)
of the Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005, to
receive, store, safeguard and retrieve the KYC records in digital form of a Customer.
Page 6 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
(iii) “Customer “means.
a) a person who is engaged in a financial transaction or activity with MAFIL and
includes a person on whose behalf the person who is engaged in the transaction
or activity is acting.
b) any other person connected with a financial transaction which can pose
significant reputation or other risks to MAFIL.
(iv) “Digital KYC” means capturing live photo of the Customer and officially valid
document or the proof of possession of Aadhaar, where offline verification cannot be
carried out, along with the latitude and longitude of the location where such live photo
is being taken by an authorized officer of the Regulated Entity (RE) as per the
provisions contained in the Act.
(v) “Digital Signature” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by
means of an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (1) of section (2) of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).
(vi) “Equivalent e-document” means an electronic equivalent of a document, issued by
the issuing authority of such document with its valid digital signature including
documents issued to the digital locker account of the Customer as per rule 9 of the
Information Technology (Preservation and Retention of Information by
Intermediaries Providing Digital Locker Facilities) Rules, 2016.
(vii) FATCA” means Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act of the United States of
America (USA) which, inter alia, requires foreign financial institutions to report about
financial accounts held by U.S. taxpayers or foreign entities in which U.S. taxpayers
hold a substantial ownership interest.
(viii) Know Your Client (KYC) Identifier” means the unique number or code assigned to a
Customer by the Central KYC Records Registry.
(ix) Non-face-to-face Customers means Customers who open accounts without visiting
branches / offices of MAFIL or meeting its officials.
(x) “Obtaining certified copy of Officially Valid Document (OVD)” – Means comparing the
copy of OVD with the original and recording the same on the copy by authorized
officer of MAFIL. Provided that in case of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) and Persons
of Indian Origin (PIOs), as defined in Foreign Exchange Management (Deposit)
Regulations, 2016 {FEMA 5(R)}, alternatively, the original certified copy of OVD,
certified by any one of the following, may be obtained:
● authorised officials of overseas branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks
registered in India,
● branches of overseas banks with whom Indian banks have relationships,
● Notary Public abroad,
● Court Magistrate,
● Judge,
● Indian Embassy/Consulate General in the country where the non-resident
Customer resides.
(xi) “Offline verification” means the process of verifying the identity of the Aadhaar
Page 7 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
number holder without authentication, through such offline modes as per clause (pa)
of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016).
(xii) “Senior Management”
Senior Management for the purpose of the Policy shall constitute MD & CEO,
Chief Financial Officer, Head - Analytics and Business Review, Company Secretary, Vice
President – Compliance Head CCO, Chief Risk Office, Head - Information Technology
Department, Head - Human Resource Department, Head - Internal Audit Department, HRM
Training Head, Head of Operation Department, Head of Vigilance Department, Business
Head of Gold Loan Department.
.
(xiii) Video based Customer Identification Process (V-CIP)”: an alternative method of
customer identification with facial recognition and customer due diligence by an
authorised official of the RE by undertaking seamless, secure, live, informed consent
based audio-visual interaction with the customer to obtain identification information
required for CDD purpose, and to ascertain the veracity of the information furnished
by the customer through independent verification and maintaining audit trail of the
process. Such processes complying with prescribed standards and
procedures shall be treated on par with face-to-face CIP. for the purpose of
this Master Direction.
(xiv) “Walk-in Customer” means a person who does not have an account-based
relationship with the RE, but undertakes transactions with the RE.
(xv) “Wire transfer” related definitions:
a. Batch transfer: Batch transfer is a transfer comprised of a number of individual wire
transfers that are being sent to the same financial institutions but may/may not be
ultimately intended for different persons.
b. Beneficiary: Beneficiary refers to a natural or legal person or legal arrangement
who / which is identified by the originator as the receiver of the requested wire transfer.
c. Beneficiary RE: It refers to a financial institution, regulated by the RBI, which
receives the wire transfer from the ordering financial institution directly or through an
intermediary RE and makes the funds available to the beneficiary.
d. Cover Payment: Cover Payment refers to a wire transfer that combines a payment
message sent directly by the ordering financial institution to the beneficiary financial
institution with the routing of the funding instruction (the cover) from the ordering
financial institution to the beneficiary financial institution through one or more
intermediary financial institutions.
e. Cross-border wire transfer: Cross-border wire transfer refers to any wire transfer
where the ordering financial institution and beneficiary financial institution are located
in different countries. This term also refers to any chain of wire transfer in which at
least one of the financial institutions involved is located in a different country.
Page 8 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
f. Domestic wire transfer: Domestic wire transfer refers to any wire transfer where the
ordering financial institution and beneficiary financial institution are located in India.
This term, therefore, refers to any chain of wire transfer that takes place entirely within
the borders of India, even though the system used to transfer the payment message
may be located in another country.
g. Financial Institution: In the context of wire-transfer instructions, the term ‘Financial
Institution’ shall have the same meaning as has been ascribed to it in the FATF
Recommendations, as revised from time to time.
h. Intermediary RE: Intermediary RE refers to a financial institution or any other entity,
regulated by the RBI which handles an intermediary element of the wire transfer, in a
serial or cover payment chain and that receives and transmits a wire transfer on behalf
of the ordering financial institution and the beneficiary financial institution, or another
intermediary financial institution.
i. Ordering RE: Ordering RE refers to the financial institution, regulated by the RBI,
which initiates the wire transfer and transfers the funds upon receiving the request for
a wire transfer on behalf of the originator.
j. Originator: Originator refers to the account holder who allows the wire transfer from
that account, or where there is no account, the natural or legal person that places the
order with the ordering financial institution to perform the wire transfer.
k. Serial Payment: Serial Payment refers to a direct sequential chain of payment
where the wire transfer and accompanying payment message travel together from the
ordering financial institution to the beneficiary financial institution directly or through
one or more intermediary financial institutions (e.g., correspondent banks).
l. Straight-through Processing: Straight-through processing refers to payment
transactions that are conducted electronically without the need for manual
intervention.
m. Unique transaction reference number: Unique transaction reference number refers
to a combination of letters, numbers or symbols, determined by the payment service
provider, in accordance with the protocols of the payment and settlement system or
messaging system used for the wire transfer.
n. Wire transfer: Wire transfer refers to any transaction carried out on behalf of an
originator through a financial institution by electronic means with a view to making an
amount of funds available to a beneficiary at a beneficiary financial institution,
irrespective of whether the originator and the beneficiary are the same person.
(o) All other expressions unless defined herein shall have the same meaning as have
been assigned to them under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1935, the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, the Prevention of
Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005, the 23Aadhaar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 and
regulations made thereunder, any statutory modification or re-enactment thereto or as
used in commercial parlance, as the case may be.
xvi. Customer Due Diligence (CDD)
Customer Due Diligence (CDD)” means identifying and verifying the customer and the
beneficial owner using reliable and independent sources of identification.
Explanation – The CDD, at the time of commencement of an account-based relationship or
while carrying out occasional transaction of an amount equal to or exceeding rupees fifty
Page 9 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
thousand, whether conducted as a single transaction or several transactions that appear to be
connected, or any international money transfer operations, shall include:
a. Identification of the customer, verification of their identity using reliable and
independent sources of identification, obtaining information on the purpose and
intended nature of the business relationship, where applicable.
b. Taking reasonable steps to understand the nature of the customer's business, and its
ownership and control.
c. Determining whether a customer is acting on behalf of a beneficial owner, and
identifying the beneficial owner and taking all steps to verify the identity of the
beneficial owner, using reliable and independent sources of identification.
• Designated Director" means a person designated by the RE to ensure overall compliance
with the obligations imposed under chapter IV of the PML Act and the Rules and shall
include:
a. the Managing Director or a whole-time Director, duly authorized by the Board of
Directors, If the RE is a company,
b. the Managing Partner, if the RE is a partnership firm,
c. the Proprietor, if the RE is a proprietorship concern,
d. the Managing Trustee, if the RE is a trust,
e. a person or individual, as the case may be, who controls and manages the affairs
of the RE, if the RE is an unincorporated association or a body of individuals, and
f. a person who holds the position of senior management or equivalent designated
as a 'Designated Director’ in respect of Cooperative Banks and Regional Rural
Banks.
g. Explanation - For the purpose of this clause, the terms "Managing Director" and
"Whole-time Director" shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Companies
Act, 2013..
b) The name, designation and address of the Designated Director shall be communicated to
the FIU-IND.
(d) In no case, the Principal Officer shall be nominated as the 'Designated Director'.
• “Person” has the same meaning assigned in the Act and includes:
a. an individual,
b. a Hindu undivided family,
c. a company,
d. a firm,
e. an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not,
f. every artificial juridical person, not falling within any one of the above persons (a to e),
and
g. any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any of the above persons (a to f).
Page 10 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
• “Non-profit organization” means which will now include any entity or organization
constituted for religious or charitable purposes referred to in Section 2(15) of the Income-
tax Act, 1961; or registered as a trust or a society under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 or any similar state legislation; or a company registered under Section 8 of the
Companies Act, 2013
• “Suspicious transaction” means a “transaction” as defined below, including an
attempted transaction, whether or not made in cash, which, to a person acting in good
faith:
a. gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve proceeds of an
offence specified in the Schedule to the Act, regardless of the value involved; or
b. appears to be made in circumstances of unusual or unjustified complexity; or
c. appears to not have economic rationale or bona-fide purpose; or
d. gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve financing of the
activities relating to terrorism.
Explanation: Transaction involving financing of the activities relating to terrorism includes
transaction involving funds suspected to be linked or related to, or to be used for terrorism,
terrorist acts or by a terrorist, terrorist organization or those who finance or are attempting to
finance terrorism.
• “Transaction” means a purchase, sale, loan, pledge, gift, transfer, delivery or the
arrangement thereof and includes:
a. opening of an account;
b. deposit, withdrawal, exchange or transfer of funds in whatever currency, whether in
cash or by cheque, payment order or other instruments or by electronic or other non-
physical means;
c. the use of a safety deposit box or any other form of safe deposit;
d. entering into any fiduciary relationship;
e. any payment made or received, in whole or in part, for any contractual or other legal
obligation; or
f. establishing or creating a legal person or legal arrangement.
i. “Common Reporting Standards” (CRS) means reporting standards set for implementation
of multilateral agreement signed to automatically exchange information based on Article 6 of
the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters.
6. KEY ELEMENTS OF THE POLICY
As mentioned in the scope above, this Policy is applicable to all business operations and
services including DP services, Money Transfer Services, etc and also applicable to
business verticals of MAFIL and it is to be read in conjunction with related operational
guidelines issued from time to time.
The Policy includes the following key elements:
a. Customer Acceptance Policy (CAP)
b. Customer Identification Procedures (CIP)
c. Monitoring of Transactions (including Reporting STR, CTR & CCR) & Ongoing
Page 11 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
Monitoring
d. Risk Management
6.1 CUSTOMER ACCEPTANCE POLICY (CAP)
MAFIL’s CAP lays down criteria for acceptance of Customers. While taking decision
to grant any facilities to the Customers as well as during the continuation of any
facilities the following norms and procedures will be followed by the company
a. No account will be opened in anonymous or fictitious/benami name.
b. Customers will be accepted only after verifying their identity, as laid down in Customer
Identification Procedures. Necessary checks will be done before opening a new
account to ensure that the identity of the Customer does not match with any person
with known criminal background or with banned entities.
c. MAFIL will refrain from opening an account where the company is unable to apply
appropriate Customer Due Diligence (CDD) measures either due to non-cooperation
of the Customer or non-reliability of the documents/information furnished by the
Customer.
d. No transaction or account-based relationship shall be undertaken without the
Customer Due Diligence procedure (CDD), set out in para 6.3 of this Policy. CDD
procedures to be followed for all joint account holders while opening joint accounts.
e. A Unique Customer Identification Code (UCIC) shall be allotted to new and existing
Customers. MAFIL shall apply the CDD procedure at the UCIC level. Thus, if an
existing KYC compliant Customer of MAFIL desires to open another account with
MAFIL, there shall be no need for a fresh CDD exercise.
f. MAFIL has a system in place to ensure that the identity of the Customer does not
match with any person or entity, whose name appears in the sanctions lists circulated
by Reserve Bank of India.
g. Where Permanent Account Number (PAN) is obtained, the same shall be verified
from the verification facility of the issuing authority.
h. Where an equivalent e-document is obtained from the Customer, RE shall verify the
digital signature as per the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of
2000).
i. MAFIL shall ensure to specify the mandatory information which need to be sought for
KYC purpose while opening an account and during the periodic updation.
j. MAFIL shall ensure the optional /Additional information, where such information
requirement has not been specified in the internal KYC Policy of the RE, is obtained
with the explicit consent of the customer after the account is opened. Circumstances
in which, a customer is permitted to act on behalf of another person/entity, is clearly
spelt out.
k. Where Goods and Services Tax (GST) details are available the GST number shall be
verified from the search/verification facility of the issuing authority.
l. Where MAFIL is suspicious of money laundering or terrorist financing, and it
reasonably believes that performing the CDD process will tip-off the customer, it shall
not pursue the CDD process, and instead file an STR
Implementation of CAP should not become too restrictive and result in denial of the
MAFIL’s services to public, especially those who are financially or socially
disadvantaged.
Page 12 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
6.2 CUSTOMER IDENTIFICATION PROCEDURE (CIP)
Customer Identification involves verification of Customer’s identity by using reliable,
independent source documents, data, or information. MAFIL shall obtain enough
information necessary to verify the identity of each Customer. A broad guideline for
the Customer identification is given below:
MAFIL shall ensure that Customer identification process is undertaken, whenever, an
account-based relationship is being established.
a. carrying out any international money transfer operations for a person who is
not an account holder.
b. there is doubt about the authenticity or adequacy of Customer identification
data already obtained.
c. selling third party products as agents, selling their own products, payment of
dues of credit cards/sale and reloading of prepaid/travel cards and any other
product for more than rupees fifty thousand.
d. carrying out transactions with walk in Customers, where the amount involves
equal or exceeds rupees fifty thousand, whether conducted as a single
transaction or
several transactions that appear to be connected.
e. MAFIL has reasons to believe that a Customer is intentionally structuring
transactions into a series of transactions below the threshold of Rupees Fifty
thousand.
f. MAFIL shall also ensure that introduction is not to be sought while opening
accounts.
6.2.1 VIDEO BASED CUSTOMER IDENTIFICATION PROCESS (V-CIP):
MAFIL may undertake live V-CIP for establishment of an account-based relationship
with an individual Customer after obtaining his informed consent and adhering to the
procedures prescribed in RBI regulations. This process shall be treated as face to
face process for the purpose of Customer identification.
The officials performing the V-CIP shall record video as well as capture photograph
of the Customer present for identification and obtain the identification information as
below:
a. Shall capture a clear image of PAN card to be displayed by the Customer during
the process, except in cases where e-PAN is provided by the Customer. The
PAN details shall be verified from the database of the issuing authority.
b. Live location of the Customer (Geotagging) shall be captured to ensure that
Customer is physically present in India.
c. The official shall ensure that photograph of the Customer in the Aadhaar/PAN
details matches with the Customer undertaking the V-CIP and the dentification
details in Aadhaar/PAN shall match with the details provided by the Customer.
d. The official shall ensure that the sequence and/or type of questions during video
interactions are varied in order to establish that the interactions are real-time
Page 13 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
and not pre-recorded.
e. In case of offline verification of Aadhaar using XML file or Aadhaar Secure QR
Code, it shall be ensured that the XML file or QR code generation date is not
older than 3 days from the date of carrying out V-CIP.
f. All accounts opened through V-CIP shall be made operational only after being
subject to concurrent audit, to ensure the integrity of process.
g. It shall be ensured that the process is a seamless, real-time, secured, end-to-
end encrypted audio-visual interaction with the Customer and the quality of the
communication is adequate to allow identification of the Customer beyond
doubt. MAFIL shall carry out the liveliness check in order to guard against
spoofing and such other fraudulent manipulations.
h. To ensure security, robustness and end to end encryption, MAFIL shall carry
out software and security audit and validation of the V-CIP application before
rolling it out.
i. The audio-visual interaction shall be triggered from the domain of MAFIL and
not from third party service provider, if any. The officials operating the V-CIP
process shall be specifically trained for this purpose. The activity log along with
the credentials of the official performing the V-CIP shall be preserved.
j. The video recording shall be stored in a safe and secure manner and bears the
date and time stamp.
k. It shall be ensured that the Aadhaar number is redacted or blacked-out.
V- CIP Infrastructure
i) The RE should have complied with the RBI guidelines on minimum baseline cyber
security and resilience framework for banks, as updated from time to time as well as
other general guidelines on IT risks. The technology infrastructure should be housed
in own premises of the RE and the V-CIP connection and interaction shall necessarily
originate from its own secured network domain. Any technology related outsourcing
for the process should be compliant with relevant RBI guidelines. Where cloud
deployment model is used, it shall be ensured that the ownership of data in such
model rests with the RE only and all the data including video recording is transferred
to the RE’s exclusively owned / leased server(s) including cloud server, if any,
immediately after the V-CIP process is completed and no data shall be retained by
the cloud service provider or third-party technology provider assisting the V-CIP of
the RE.
ii) The RE shall ensure end-to-end encryption of data between customer device and
the hosting point of the V-CIP application, as per appropriate encryption standards.
The customer consent should be recorded in an auditable and alteration proof
manner.
iii) The V-CIP infrastructure / application should be capable of preventing connection
from IP addresses outside India or from spoofed IP addresses.
iv) The video recordings should contain the live GPS co-ordinates (geo-tagging) of
the customer undertaking the V-CIP and date-time stamp. The quality of the live video
in the V-CIP shall be adequate to allow identification of the customer beyond doubt.
Page 14 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
v) The application shall have components with face liveness / spoof detection as well
as face matching technology with high degree of accuracy, even though the ultimate
responsibility of any customer identification rests with the RE. Appropriate artificial
intelligence (AI) technology can be used to ensure that the V-CIP is robust.
vi) Based on experience of detected / attempted / ‘near-miss’ cases of forged identity,
the technology infrastructure including application software as well as work flows shall
be regularly upgraded. Any detected case of forged identity through V-CIP shall be
reported as a cyber event under extant regulatory guidelines.
vii) The V-CIP infrastructure shall undergo necessary tests such as Vulnerability
Assessment, Penetration testing and a Security Audit to ensure its robustness and
end-to-end encryption capabilities. Any critical gap reported under this process shall
be mitigated before rolling out its implementation. Such tests should be conducted by
the empanelled auditors of Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In).
Such tests should also be carried out periodically in conformance to internal /
regulatory guidelines.
viii) The V-CIP application software and relevant APIs / webservices shall also
undergo appropriate testing of functional, performance, maintenance strength before
being used in live environment. Only after closure of any critical gap found during
such tests, the application should be rolled out. Such tests shall also be carried out
periodically in conformity with internal/ regulatory guidelines
V-CIP PROCEDURE
In case of offline verification of Aadhaar using XML file or Aadhaar Secure QR Code,
it shall be ensured that the XML file or QR code generation date is not older than
three working days from the date of carrying out V-CIP.
6.3. CUSTOMER DUE DILIGENCE PROCEDURE (CDD) IN CASE OF INDIVIDUALS
For undertaking CDD, MAFIL shall obtain the following from an individual while
establishing an account-based relationship or while dealing with individual who is a
beneficial owner, authorised signatory or power of attorney holder related to any legal
entity. The use of Aadhaar, proof of possession of Aadhaar etc., shall be in accordance
with the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies Benefits and
Services) Act, 2016 and the regulations made thereunder
a. A certified copy of Officially Valid Documents (OVD), as given in Annexure I.
b. One recent photograph (For the gold loan Customers capturing of photos of
the individuals and keeping in the ERP to be continued).
c. Permanent Account Number or the equivalent e-document thereof or Form
No. 60 as defined in Income-tax Rules, 1962; and
d. Such other documents pertaining to the nature of business or financial status
specified in this Policy.
Page 15 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
6.3.1. OFFLINE VERIFICATION THROUGH PROOF OF POSSESSION OF AADHAAR
NUMBER:
MAFIL may carry out Offline Verification of Customers if they are desirous of
undergoing Aadhaar Offline Verification for identification purposes. No such offline
verification shall be performed without obtaining the written consent of the Customer in
the manner prescribed in the Aadhaar Regulations.
The proof of possession of Aadhaar number where offline verification cannot be carried
out or any OVD or the equivalent e-document thereof containing the details of his
identity and Address; or the KYC Identifier with an explicit consent to download records
from CKYCR;
Wherever Aadhaar details are collected, it shall be ensured that Customers have
redacted or blacked out their Aadhaar numbers through appropriate means. The e-KYC
service of Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) shall be accepted as a valid
process for KYC verification, when NBFCs or itself are authorized by RBI to do such
verification for establishing account-based relationship.
6.3.2 Accounts opened using Aadhaar OTP based e-KYC, in non-face-to-face mode
MAFIL shall ensure that transaction alerts, OTP, etc., are sent only to the mobile number
of the customer registered with Aadhaar. MAFIL has a robust process of due diligence for
dealing with requests for change of mobile number in such accounts.
6.3.3 VERIFICATION THROUGH DIGITAL KYC:
MAFIL may carry out verification by capturing live photo of the Customer and OVD or
the proof of possession of Aadhaar, where offline verification cannot be carried out,
along with latitude and longitude of the location where such live photo is being taken by
the authorized officer of the Company. Guidelines on digital KYC process is provided
in Annexure V.
6.3.4 VERIFICATION OF EQUIVALENT E‐DOCUMENT:
Where the Customer submits an equivalent e‐document of any Officially Valid
Document (OVD), issued by the issuing authority of such document with its valid digital
signature including documents issued to the digital locker account of the Customer,
MAFIL shall verify the digital signature as per the provisions of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 and take live photo of the Customer as specified in the guidelines
for digital KYC.
6.4 IDENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIAL OWNER
For opening an account of a Legal Person who is not a natural person, the beneficial
owner(s) shall be identified and all reasonable steps to verify his/her identity shall be
undertaken keeping in view the following:
a. Where the Customer or the owner of the controlling interest is (i) an entity listed
on a stock exchange in India, or (ii) is an entity resident in jurisdictions notified by
Page 16 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
the Central Government and listed on stock exchanges in such jurisdictions, or
(iii) is a subsidiary of such a company, it is not necessary to identify and verify the identity
of any shareholder or beneficial owner of such companies.
b. In cases of trust/nominee or fiduciary accounts whether the Customer is acting on behalf
of another person as trustee/nominee or any other intermediary is determined. In such
cases, satisfactory evidence of the identity of the intermediaries and of the persons on
whose behalf they are acting, as also details of the nature of the trust or other
arrangements in place shall be obtained.
6.5 CDD MEASURES IN RESPECT OF NON-INDIVIDUALS:
CDD Standards and documents to be collected in respect of Proprietary firms, partnership
firms, companies and other Legal entities are given in Annexure I.
7. CUSTOMER DUE DILIGENCE BY THIRD PARTY
In compliance of the KYC regulations, MAFIL may rely on the Customer due diligence done by
third parties, for verifying identity of Customers at the time of commencement of account-based
relationship, subject to the following conditions.
a. Records or information of the Customer due diligence carried out by the third party is
obtained immediately from the third party or from Central KYC Records Registry.
b. MAFIL is satisfied that copies of the identification data and other relevant documents
relating to the Customer due diligence requirements will be available from the third party
up on request without delay.
c. The third party is regulated, supervised, or monitored and has capabilities to comply with
the Customer due diligence and record keeping requirements as prescribed in the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act.
d. The third party shall not be based in a country or jurisdiction assessed as high risk.
The ultimate responsibility for Customer due diligence and undertaking enhanced due diligence
measures, as applicable, will be with MAFIL. (Description of RE are given in Annexure II).
REs shall ensure compliance with KYC Policy through:
i. Specifying as to who constitute ‘Senior Management’ for the purpose of KYC
compliance.
ii. Allocation of responsibility for effective implementation of policies and procedures
iii. at HO / Zonal Office / Branch level.
iv. Independent evaluation of the compliance functions of REs’ policies and procedures,
including legal and regulatory requirements.
v. Concurrent/internal audit system to verify the compliance with KYC/AML policies and
procedures.
vi. Submission of quarterly audit notes and compliance to the Audit Committee.
REs shall ensure that decision-making functions of determining compliance with KYC norms are not
outsourced.
Page 17 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
8. SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURES FOR SMALL VALUE LOANS:
In case a person who desires to open an account is not able to produce identity
documents as mentioned in Annexure I (i.e., any of OVDs and PAN/ Form 60), Proof of
Identity alone will be sufficient provided that the Customer gives full and complete
address in the loan application form and his telephone number is confirmed by the
branches to be correct. Interim / Temporary KYC documents such as Labour card, Civil
ID card, Credit Card, Employer Company ID card, LIC card, State ID card, Bank
Passbook, etc. may be accepted subject to the following conditions:
a. The Customer shall provide his self-attested photograph.
b. Branch Head/ Designated Officer of MAFIL shall certify under his/her signature that
the Customer has affixed his signature or thumb impression in his presence.
c. The account shall remain operational initially for 12 months, within which the
Customer must furnish his identity documents for conducting CDD as mentioned in
para 6.3. Customer shall be suitably informed at the time of starting the relationship.
d. Maximum outstanding shall not exceed Rs 0.50 Lakh in all their accounts taken
together at any point of time and the total credit in all the accounts taken together
shall not exceed Rs. 1.00 lakh in a year.
e. The Customer shall be made aware that no further transaction will be permitted until
full KYC procedure is completed in case of condition no. d. as mentioned above is
breached.
f. Regularization of Interim/Temporary KYC: In-order to avoid any inconvenience to the
Customers MAFIL shall notify the Customer when the balance reaches rupees forty
thousand (Rs. 40,000/-) or the total credit in a year reaches rupees eighty thousand
(Rs. 80,000/-) that appropriate documents for conducting the KYC must be submitted
and that otherwise the operations in the account will be stopped when the total
balance in all the accounts taken together exceeds Rs.0.50 lakh at any point of time
or the total credit in the accounts in year exceeds Rs 1.00 Lakh.
g. Permanent and communication address of the customer is collected through the
application form submitted.
h. The account shall be monitored and when there is suspicion of ML/TF activities or
other high-risk scenarios, the identity of the customer shall be established as per
Section 16 or Section 18 of KYC Master Direction.
KYC verification once done by one branch shall be valid for transfer of account to any
other branch, provided full KYC verification has already been done and the same is not
due for periodic updating.
9. SELLING THIRD PARTY PRODUCTS
While selling third party products, MAFIL shall comply with the following directions:
a. Identity and address of the walk-in Customers shall be verified for transactions
Page 18 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
above Rs 0.50 lakh, whether conducted as a single transaction or several
transactions that appear to be connected.
b. Transaction details of sale of third-party products and related records shall be
maintained as specified under this Policy.
c. AML software capable of capturing, generating and analyzing alerts for the
purpose of filing CTR/STR in respect of transactions relating to third party products
with Customers including walk-in Customers shall be made available.
d. Transactions involving Rs 0.50 lakh and above shall be undertaken only by:
▪ Debit to Customer’s account or against cheque, transfer from banks / debit
cards / credit card etc.
▪ Obtaining and verifying PAN (regular Customer as well as walk in Customer).
Note: Direction no. d shall also apply to sale of MAFIL’s own products, sale and
reloading of prepaid / travel cards and any other products for Rs 0.50 lakh and above.
10. ISSUANCE OF PREPAID PAYMENT INSTRUMENTS (PPI)
With regard to PPI, MAFIL shall ensure that the instructions issued by Department of
Payment and Settlement System of Reserve Bank of India through their Master
Direction are strictly adhered to.
11. MONITORING OF TRANSACTIONS
a. MAFIL shall monitor transactions on an ongoing basis for the purpose of reporting
it to the appropriate authorities in case any suspicious transactions are found to
be carried out by the concerned Customer. (An illustrative list of suspicious
transactions is given in Annexure III). The extent of monitoring by the MAFIL will
depend on the risk sensitivity of the account and special attention will be given to
all complex unusually large transactions, which have no apparent economic or
lawful purpose.
b. MAFIL shall exercise caution with respect to the transactions with persons
(including legal persons and other financial institutions) from the countries which
have been identified by Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as high risk and non-
cooperative jurisdictions with respect to compliance with the FATF
Recommendations, 2012.
c. Transactions carried out involving Jurisdiction and countries that do not or
insufficiently apply the FATF recommendations like the FATF Grey List countries
,i.e., those countries that are subject to increased monitoring as a result of their
AML/CFT deficiencies and the Black Listed countries, i.e., those countries that
FATF has deemed to have “significant strategic deficiencies” in their AML/CFT
regimes shall be subject to additional monitoring.
FATF Statements circulated by Reserve Bank of India from time to time, and
publicly available information, for identifying countries, which do not or
insufficiently apply the FATF Recommendations, shall be considered. REs shall
apply enhanced due diligence measures, which are effective and proportionate to
the risks, to business relationships and transactions with natural and legal persons
(including financial institutions) from countries for which this is called for by the
FATF.
Page 19 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
Special attention shall be given to business relationships and transactions with
persons (including legal persons and other financial institutions) from or in
countries that do not or insufficiently apply the FATF Recommendations and
jurisdictions included in FATF Statements.
The background and purpose of transactions with persons (including legal
persons and other financial institutions) from jurisdictions included in FATF Statements and
countries that do not or insufficiently apply the FATF Recommendations shall be examined,
and written findings together with all documents shall be retained and shall be made available
to Reserve Bank/other relevant authorities, on request.
d. MAFIL shall file Suspicious Transaction Report (STR), Cash Transaction Report
(CTR), counterfeit currency report (CCR) and other applicable reports filling under
FATCA in terms of the direction of the RBI/PMLA in respect of all products/
services.
12. ONGOING DUE DILIGENCE
a. MAFIL shall undertake on going due diligence of Customers to ensure that their
transactions are consistent with their knowledge about the Customers,
Customers’ business and risk profile, and source of funds/wealth.
b. Without prejudice to the generality of factors that call for close monitoring, the
following types of transactions are monitored closely: -
i) Large and complex transactions including RTGS transactions, and those
with unusual patterns, inconsistent with the normal and expected activity of
the Customer, which have no apparent economic rationale or legitimate
purpose.
ii) Transactions which exceed the thresholds prescribed for specific categories
of accounts.
iii) High account turnover inconsistent with the size of the balance maintained.
iv) Deposit of third-party cheques, drafts, etc. in the existing and newly opened
accounts followed by cash withdrawals for large amounts.
c. The extent of monitoring shall be aligned with the risk category of the Customer
and high-risk category accounts shall be subjected to more intensified monitoring.
d. A system of periodic review of risk categorisation of accounts, with such
periodicity being at least once in six months, and the need for applying enhanced
due diligence measures shall be put in place.
13. PERIODIC UPDATION
Periodic updation shall be carried out at least once in every two years, for high-risk
Customers, once in every eight years for medium risk Customers and once in every
ten years for low risk Customers as per the following procedure:
a. FOR INDIVIDUAL CUSTOMERS
i. No change in KYC information: In case of no change in the KYC
information, a self- declaration from the Customer in this regard shall be
obtained through Customer’s email-id registered with the MAFIL, Customer’s
mobile number registered with the MAFIL, digital channels (such as mobile
application of MAFIL), letter etc.
Page 20 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
ii. Change in address: In case of a change only in the address details of the
Customer, a self-declaration of the new address shall be obtained from the
Customer through Customer’s email-id registered with the MAFIL,
Customer’s mobile number registered with the MAFIL, digital channels (such
as mobile application of MAFIL), letter etc., and the declared address shall
be verified through positive confirmation within two months, by means such
as address verification letter, contact point verification, deliverables etc.
Further, MAFIL, may at its option, obtain a copy of OVD or deemed OVD or
the equivalent e-documents thereof, as mentioned in Annexure 1, for the
purpose of proof of address, declared by the Customer at the time of periodic
updation.
Aadhaar OTP based e-KYC in non-face to face mode may be used for
periodic updation. Declaration of current address, if the current address is
different from the address in Aadhaar, shall not require positive confirmation
in this case. MAFIL shall ensure that the mobile number for Aadhaar
authentication is same as the one available with them in the customer’s
profile, to prevent any fraud.
b. CUSTOMERS OTHER THAN INDIVIDUALS:
i. No change in KYC information: In case of no change in the KYC
information of the LE Customer, a self-declaration in this regard shall be
obtained from the LE Customer through its email id registered with MAFIL,
digital channels (such as mobile application of MAFIL), letter from an official
authorized by the LE in this regard, board resolution etc. Further, MAFIL
shall during this process ensure that the Beneficial Ownership (BO)
information available is accurate and shall update the same, if required, to
keep it as up- to-date as possible.
ii. Change in KYC information: In case of change in KYC information, MAFIL
shall undertake the KYC process equivalent to that applicable for on-
boarding a new LE Customer.
c. ADDITIONAL MEASURES: In addition to the above, MAFIL shall also ensure
that,
i. The KYC documents of the Customer as per the current CDD standards is
available and this shall be applicable even if there is no change in Customer
information but the documents available with the MAFIL are not as per the
existing CDD standards. Further, in case the validity of the CDD documents
available with MAFIL has expired at the time of periodic updation of KYC,
MAFIL shall undertake the KYC process equivalent to that applicable for on-
boarding a new Customer.
ii. Customer’s PAN details, if available with the MAFIL, is verified from the
database of the issuing authority at the time of periodic updation of KYC.
iii. An acknowledgment is provided to the Customer mentioning the date of
receipt of the relevant document(s), including self-declaration from the
Customer, for carrying out periodic updation.
iv. In order to ensure Customer convenience, MAFIL may consider making
available the facility of periodic updation of KYC at any of its branches.
v. MAFIL shall adopt a risk-based approach with respect to periodic updation
Page 21 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
of KYC.
MAFIL shall advise the customers that to comply with the PML Rules, in case of any
update in the documents submitted by the customer at the time of establishment of
business relationship / account-based relationship and thereafter, as necessary;
MAFIL will collect the update of such documents. This shall be done within 30 days of
the update to the documents for the purpose of updating the records at MAFIL’s end
(Note: The time limits prescribed above would apply from the date of opening of
the account/ last verification of KYC.)
14. EXISTING CUSTOMERS
For gold loan Customers, a copy of the PAN Card of the borrower shall be collected for
all transaction above 5 lakh as guided by the regulatory guidelines to NBFCs financing
against the collateral of gold.
Simplified norms for Self Help Groups (SHGs)
CDD of all the members of SHG may be undertaken at the time of credit linking of SHGs
Reporting Requirements to Financial Intelligence Unit – India
REs shall not put any restriction on operations in the accounts where an inf has been filed.
REs shall keep the fact of furnishing of STR strictly confidential. It shall be ensured that there
is no tipping off to the customer at any level.
15. RISK MANAGEMENT
MAFIL has put in place appropriate procedures to ensure effective implementation of
KYC guidelines.
a. Risk categorization of Customers shall be undertaken based on various factors, such
as customer’s identity, social/financial status, nature of business activity, and
information about the customer’s business and their location, geographical risk
covering customers as well as transactions, type of products/services offered, delivery
channel used for delivery of products/services, types of transaction undertaken – cash,
cheque/monetary instruments, wire transfers, forex transactions, etc. While
considering customer’s identity, the ability to confirm identity documents through online
or other services offered by issuing authorities may also be factored in
b. MAFIL has categorized its customers into ‘High Risk / Medium Risk / Low Risk’ based
on the profile of the Customers. MAFIL shall apply higher due diligence measures
keeping in view the risk level.
c. MAFIL has developed robust underwriting procedures for onboarding borrowers, which
include verification of ownership of the gold ornaments (in the case of gold loans),
assessment of financial resources of the borrowers, collection of their market reports
etc (for other loans).
d. MAFIL’s internal audit periodically evaluate the level of adherence to the KYC
procedures. Audit function shall provide an independent evaluation of the effectiveness
of KYC policies and procedures, including legal and regulatory requirements..
Page 22 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
The risk categorisation of a customer and the specific reasons for such categorisation
shall be kept confidential and shall not be revealed to the customer to avoid tipping off
the customer.
16. RISK ASSESSMENT
MAFIL shall carry out ‘Money Laundering (ML) and Terrorist Financing (TF) Risk
Assessment’ exercise periodically to identify, assess and take effective measures to
mitigate its money laundering and terrorist financing risk. The assessment process
shall consider all the relevant risk factors before determining the level of overall risk
and the appropriate level and type of mitigation to be applied. While preparing the
internal risk assessment, cognizance of the overall sector-specific vulnerabilities if any,
that the regulator/supervisor may share from time to time shall be taken.
The risk assessment exercise shall be conducted on a quarterly basis and parameters
of the assessment shall be modified, in alignment with the outcome of the risk
assessment exercise. An internal document detailing the assessment process may be
kept separately for the same.
The outcome of the exercise shall be put up to Risk Management Committee and
should be available to competent authorities and self-regulating bodies.
MAFIL shall carry out sanctions screening based on the consolidated list of RBI. The
department shall update the list at periodical intervals. Such screening will be carried
out automatically/manually of all Customers at the time of on boarding. MAFIL shall
apply a Risk Based Approach (RBA) for mitigation and management of the identified
risk and shall monitor the implementation of the controls and enhance them, if
necessary.
REs are encouraged to leverage latest technological innovations and tools for effective
implementation of name screening to meet the sanctions requirements.
17. A. ENHANCED DUE DILIGENCE
(1) Company shall, prior to the commencement of each specified transaction,—
(a) verify the identity of the clients undertaking such specified transaction by
authentication under the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
Benefits, and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016) in such manner and subject to such
conditions, as may be prescribed:
Provided that where verification requires authentication of a person who is not entitled
to obtain an Aadhar number under the provisions of the said Act, verification to
authenticate the identity of the client undertaking such specified transaction shall be
carried out by such other process or mode, as may be prescribed;
(b) take additional steps to examine the ownership and financial position, including
sources of funds of the client, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) take additional steps as may be prescribed to record the purpose behind
conducting the specified transaction and the intended nature of the relationship
between the transaction parties.
(2) Where the client fails to fulfill the conditions laid down under sub-section (1),
the reporting entity shall not allow the specified transaction to be carried out.
Page 23 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
(3) Where any specified transaction or series of specified transactions undertaken
by a client is considered suspicious or likely to involve proceeds of crime, the reporting
entity shall increase the future monitoring of the business relationship with the client,
including greater scrutiny or transactions in such manner as may be prescribed. The
opening of accounts and monitoring of transactions shall be strictly adhered to, in order
to minimise the operations of “Money Mules” which are used to launder the proceeds
of fraud schemes (e.g., phishing and identity theft) by criminals who gain illegal access
to deposit accounts by recruiting third parties which act as “money mules.” MAFIL shall
undertake diligence measures and meticulous monitoring to identify accounts which
are operated as Money Mules and take appropriate action, including reporting of
suspicious transactions to FIU-IND.
(4) The information obtained while applying the enhanced due diligence measures
under sub-section (1) shall be maintained for a period of five years from the date of
transaction between a client and the reporting entity.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "specified transaction" means—
(a) any withdrawal or deposit in cash, exceeding such amount;
(b) any transaction in foreign exchange, exceeding such amount;
(c) any transaction in any high value imports or remittances;
(d) such other transaction or class of transactions, in the interest of revenue or
where there is a high risk or money-laundering or terrorist financing, as may be
prescribed.
17.1 ACCOUNTS OF POLITICALLY EXPOSED PERSONS (PEP): Politically
Exposed Persons are those individuals who are or have been entrusted with
prominent public functions by a foreign country including the Heads of
States/Governments, senior politicians, senior government/judicial/military
officers, senior executives of state-owned corporations, important political party
officials, etc.
Special care and diligence shall be taken in respect of Politically Exposed
Persons. Generally, the MAFIL may not (would not) open loan accounts of PEP.
However, any request from PEPs shall be escalated to Senior Management and
will be dealt with based on their approval and will be subject to enhanced due
diligence (comprising of additional documents) and monitoring.
(a) sufficient information including information about the sources of funds,
accounts of family members and close relatives is gathered on the PEP;
(b) the identity of the person shall have been verified before accepting the PEP
as a customer.
(c) the decision to open an account for a PEP is taken at a senior level in
accordance with the MAFIL Customer Acceptance Policy.
(d) all such accounts are subjected to enhanced monitoring on an on-going basis;
(e) in the event of an existing customer or the beneficial owner of an existing
account subsequently becoming a PEP, senior management’s approval is
obtained to continue the business relationship.
(f) the CDD measures as applicable to PEPs including enhanced monitoring on
an on-going basis are applicable.
B. These instructions shall also be applicable to accounts where a PEP is the
beneficial owner, to family members or close relatives of PEP.
Page 24 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
17.2 ACCOUNTS OF NON-FACE-TO-FACE CUSTOMERS: These Customers are
those who opened accounts without visiting the branches / offices of MAFIL or
meeting its officials. MAFIL shall ensure that first payment from these accounts
shall be affected through the Customers’ KYC-Complied account with another
Regulated Entity.
17.3 Enhanced Due Diligence (EDD) for non-face-to-face customer onboarding
(other than customer onboarding in terms of Section 17):
Non-face-to-face onboarding facilitates the REs to establish relationship with the
customer without meeting the customer physically or through V-CIP. Such non-
face-to-face modes for the purpose of this Section includes use of digital
channels such as CKYCR, DigiLocker, equivalent e-document, etc., and non-
digital modes such as obtaining copy of OVD certified by additional certifying
authorities as allowed for NRIs and PIOs.
Following EDD measures shall be undertaken by REs for non face-to-face
customer onboarding (other than customer onboarding in terms of Section 17):
a) In case RE has introduced the process of V-CIP, the same shall be provided
as the first option to the customer for remote onboarding. It is reiterated that
processes complying with prescribed standards and procedures for V-CIP shall
be treated on par with face-to-face CIP for the purpose of this Master Direction.
b) In order to prevent frauds, alternate mobile numbers shall not be linked post
CDD with such accounts for transaction OTP, transaction updates, etc.
Transactions shall be permitted only from the mobile number used for account
opening.
c) Apart from obtaining the current address proof, RE shall verify the current
address through positive confirmation before allowing operations in the account.
Positive confirmation may be carried out by means such as address verification
letter, contact point verification, deliverables, etc.
d) RE shall obtain PAN from the customer and the PAN shall be verified from the
verification facility of the issuing authority.
e) First transaction in such accounts shall be a credit from existing KYC-complied
bank account of the customer.
f) Such customers shall be categorized as high-risk customers and accounts
opened in non-face to face mode shall be subjected to enhanced monitoring until
the identity of the customer is verified in face-to-face manner or through V-CIP
17.4 CLIENT ACCOUNTS OPENED BY PROFESSIONAL INTERMEDIARIES:
MAFIL shall ensure while opening client accounts through professional
intermediaries, that:
a. Clients shall be identified when client account is opened by a professional
intermediary on behalf of a single client.
b. MAFIL shall have option to hold 'pooled' accounts managed by professional
intermediaries on behalf of entities like mutual funds, pension funds or other
types of funds.
c. MAFIL shall not open accounts of such professional intermediaries who are
bound by any client confidentiality that prohibits disclosure of the client details
to MAFIL.
d. All the beneficial owners shall be identified where funds held by the
intermediaries are not co-mingled at the level of MAFIL, and there are 'sub-
Page 25 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
accounts', each of them attributable to a beneficial owner, or where such funds
are co-mingled at the level of MAFIL, the MAFIL shall look for the beneficial
owners.
e. MAFIL may, at its discretion, rely on the 'Customer due diligence' (CDD) done
by an intermediary, provided that the intermediary is a regulated and
supervised entity and has adequate systems in place to comply with the KYC
requirements of the Customers.
f. The ultimate responsibility for knowing the Customer lies with MAFIL.
17.5 CLIENTS OF SPECIAL CATEGORY (CSC): As per the guidelines on AML
standards of SEBI, enhanced due diligence is required for Customers belonging
to CSC (Eg. non – residents, High net worth clients etc). Appropriate measures
shall be exercised by way of independent judgment to ascertain whether new
clients engaged through DP services need to be classified as CSC or not. An
illustrative list of Special Category Customers identifiable to DP is given in
Annexure IV.
17.6 Simplified KYC norms for Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) –
Accounts of FPIs which are eligible/ registered as per SEBI guidelines, for the
purpose of investment under Portfolio Investment Scheme (PIS), shall be opened
by accepting KYC documents as detailed in Annex III, subject to Income Tax
(FATCA/CRS) Rules. Provided that banks shall obtain undertaking from FPIs or
the Global Custodian acting on behalf of the FPI that as and when required, the
exempted documents as detailed in Annex III will be submitted
Reporting requirement under Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) and
Common Reporting Standards (CRS)
Under FATCA and CRS, REs shall adhere to the provisions of Income Tax Rules 114F, 114G
and 114H and determine whether they are a Reporting Financial Institution as defined in
Income Tax Rule 114F and if so, shall take following steps for complying with the reporting
requirements:
(a) Register on the related e-filling portal of Income Tax Department as Reporting Financial
Institutions at the link https://incometaxindiaefiling.gov.in/ post login --> My Account -->
Register as Reporting Financial Institution,
(b) Submit online reports by using the digital signature of the ‘Designated Director’ by either
uploading the Form 61B or ‘NIL’ report, for which, the schema prepared by Central Board of
Direct Taxes (CBDT) shall be referred to.
Explanation: REs shall refer to the spot reference rates published by Foreign Exchange
Dealers’ Association of India (FEDAI) on their website at
http://www.fedai.org.in/RevaluationRates.aspx for carrying out the due diligence procedure for
the purposes of identifying reportable accounts in terms of Rule 114H.
(c) Develop Information Technology (IT) framework for carrying out due diligence procedure
and for recording and maintaining the same, as provided in Rule 114H.
(d) Develop a system of audit for the IT framework and compliance with Rules 114F, 114G
Page 26 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
and 114H of Income Tax Rules.
(e) Constitute a “High Level Monitoring Committee” under the Designated Director or any other
equivalent functionary to ensure compliance.
(f) Ensure compliance with updated instructions/ rules/ guidance notes/ Press releases/ issued
on the subject by Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) from time to time and available on the
web site http://www.incometaxindia.gov.in/Pages/default.aspx. REs may take note of the
following:
i. updated Guidance Note on FATCA and CRS
ii. a press release on ‘Closure of Financial Accounts’ under Rule 114H (8).
18. CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION ABOUT CUSTOMERS
All the information collected from the Customers by MAFIL shall be kept confidential
and all such information shall be treated as per the agreement/terms and conditions
signed by the Customers. Additionally, the information sought from each Customer
should be relevant to the risk perceived in respect of that Customer, should not be
intrusive and should be in line with the guidelines issued by the RBI in that behalf.
Information collected from Customers shall not be divulged for the purpose of cross
selling, or for any other purpose without the express permission of the customer.
Exception to the confidentiality of customer information shall be as under:
a. Where disclosure is under compulsion of law.
e. Where there is a duty to the public to disclose.
f. The interest of the company requires disclosure.
d. Where the disclosure is made with express or implied consent of the customer.
19. MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS
MAFIL take all reasonable steps regarding maintenance, preservation and reporting of
customer account information, with reference to provisions of PML Act and Rules
thereunder. MAFIL shall
a. maintain all necessary records of transactions between MAFIL and the
customer, both domestic and international, for at least five years from the date
of transaction or any other higher periods specified in any other law
b. preserve the records pertaining to the identification of the Customers and their
addresses obtained while opening the account and during business relationship,
for at least five years after the business relationship is ended or the account has
been closed, whichever is later.
c. Make available the identification records and transaction data to the competent
authorities upon request;
d. introduce a system of maintaining proper record of transactions prescribed
under Rule 3 of Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records)
Rules, 2005 (PML Rules, 2005)
e. maintain all necessary information in respect of transactions prescribed under
PML Rule 3 to permit reconstruction of individual transaction, including the
Page 27 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
following:
(i) the nature of the transactions.
(ii) the amount of the transaction and the currency in which it was denominated.
(iii) the date on which the transaction was conducted; and
(iv) the parties to the transaction.
f. MAFIL have a system for proper maintenance and preservation of information
in a manner (in hard and/or soft copies) that allows data to be retrieved easily
and quickly whenever required or as/ when requested by the competent
authorities.
g. Maintain records of the identity and address of its Customers, and records in
respect of transactions referred to in Rule 3 of PML Rules, in hard or soft format.
Explanation. – For the purpose of this Section, the expressions "records
pertaining to the identification", “identification records”, etc., shall include
updated records of the identification data, account files, business
correspondence and results of any analysis undertaken MAFIL shall ensure that
in case of customers who are non-profit organisations, the details of such
customers are registered on the DARPAN Portal of NITI Aayog. If the same are
not registered, MAFIL shall register the details on the DARPAN Portal. MAFIL
shall also maintain such registration records for a period of five years after the
business relationship between the customer and the MAFIL has ended or the
account has been closed, whichever is later.
20. GENERAL:
20.1 ADHERENCE TO KYC GUIDELINES BY AGENTS/ BROKERS OR THE
LIKE
a. Agents/ brokers or the like shall be appointed only after detailed due
diligence and ensuring that they are fully compliant with KYC guidelines
applicable to MAFIL.
b. MAFIL shall make available all information to RBI to verify the compliance
with KYC guidelines. MAFIL shall be responsible for non-customer
guidelines by the brokers/agents etc. who are operating on MAFIL's behalf.
20.2 PRINCIPAL OFFICER
MAFIL shall have a designated Principal Officer (PO) who shall be responsible
for ensuring compliance, monitoring transactions, sharing, and reporting
information as required under the law/regulations and responsible for furnishing
information as per rule 8 of the Rules. The Chief Compliance Officer of MAFIL
shall be the Principal Officer.
20.3 DESIGNATED DIRECTOR
MAFIL shall have a Designated Director, to ensure overall compliance with the
obligations under the Prevention of Money laundering Act, 2002 and Rules
framed thereunder, from time to time. The Managing Director and Chief
Executive Officer of MAFIL shall be the Designated Director.
Page 28 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
The name, designation and address of the Principal Officer and the Designated
Officer shall be communicated to the FIU-IND and to the RBI.
20.4. STAFF and MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES – OFFENCE OF MONEY
LAUNDERING
Staff and management shall take note that whosoever directly or indirectly attempts
to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in any
process or activity connected with the proceeds of offence of Money Laundering
shall be subjected to appropriate internal disciplinary proceedings which may lead
upto termination of service over and above the penalties under the relevant statutory
Acts/Rules/ Regulations which includes punishment of being criminally proceeded
against with and punishable with rigorous imprisonment and also liable to fine.
20.5. CDD PROCEDURE AND SHARING KYC INFORMATION WITH CENTRAL
KYC RECORDS REGISTRY (CKYCR)
MAFIL shall capture the KYC information for uploading the data pertaining to all
new individual accounts opened on or after 1/4/2017 with the CKYCR in the
manner mentioned in the Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of
Records) Rules, 2005, as amended from time to time. Additionally, MAFIL shall
also upload KYC records pertaining to accounts of Legal Entities opened on or
after April 1, 2021, with CKYCR in such manner as specified under the PML
Rules.
MAFIL shall also ensure that during periodic updation of the Customers, the
Customers are migrated to the current CDD standard as applicable to MAFIL.
Government of India has authorized the Central Registry of Securitization Asset
Reconstruction and Security Interest of India (CERSAI), to act as, and to perform
the functions of the CKYCR.
In terms of provision of Rule 9(1A) of the PML Rules, the REs shall capture
customer’s KYC records and upload onto CKYCR within 10 days of
commencement of an account-based relationship with the customer.
“KYC Templates” means templates prepared to facilitate collating and reporting
the KYC data to the CKYCR, for individuals and legal entities. The templates
may be revised from time to time, as may be required and released by CERSAI.
Once KYC Identifier is generated by CKYCR, REs shall ensure that the same is
communicated to the individual/LE as the case may be.
Where a customer, for the purposes of establishing an account-based
relationship, submits a KYC Identifier to a RE, with an explicit consent to
download records from CKYCR, then such RE shall retrieve the KYC records
online from the CKYCR using the KYC Identifier and the customer shall not be
required to submit the same KYC records or information or any other additional
identification documents or details, unless –
i. there is a change in the information of the customer as existing in the records
of CKYCR;
ii. the current address of the customer is required to be verified;
iii. the RE considers it necessary in order to verify the identity or address of the
customer, or to perform enhanced due diligence or to build an appropriate
risk profile of the client.
iv. the validity period of documents downloaded from CKYCR has lapsed.
Page 29 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
20.6. TRAINING PROGRAMME
MAFIL shall have adequate screening mechanism as an integral part of personnel
recruitment / hiring process and should have an ongoing employee training
programs so that members of the staff are adequately trained in KYC/AML/CFT
procedures. Training requirements shall have different focuses for front line staff,
Compliance Staff and officer/staff dealing with new Customers so that all
concerned fully understand the rationale behind the KYC policies and implement
them consistently. Such training may be a mix of in-house as well as through
external agencies, as the case may be.
21. COMPLIANCE WITH POLICY NORMS
a. MAFIL’s internal audit and compliance functions shall periodically evaluate the
level of adherence to the KYC policies and procedures. The compliance function
and audit function together shall provide an independent evaluation of the
effectiveness of KYC policies and procedures, including legal and regulatory
requirements. The Audit Committee of the Board shall review adherence to the
KYC guidelines at quarterly intervals.
b. Internal Audit shall on a yearly basis conduct an evaluation of compliance
functions of policies and procedures including legal and regulatory requirements.
22. OTHER OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS
a. In case of Customers whose accounts have not been operated (or who have not
been transacting) for more than 12 months, fresh KYC documents will need to
be taken before undertaking any new transactions. System based control will be
put in place.
b. As a Policy, Gold loan will be granted to individuals only and not to companies,
firms, trusts etc.
c. In the case of ‘pardanashin’ (veil) women, capturing of the customer’s
photograph (in Customer ID file on the system) may waived provided an
acceptable Proof of Identity document is furnished and KYC verification has been
carried down by any of female staffs.
23. Wire Transfer: -
A. Information requirements for wire transfers for the purpose of this Master
Direction:
i. All cross-border wire transfers shall be accompanied by accurate, complete, and
meaningful originator and beneficiary information as mentioned below:
a. name of the originator;
b. the originator account number where such an account is used to process the
transaction;
c. the originator’s address, or national identity number, or customer identification
number, or date and place of birth;
Page 30 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
d. name of the beneficiary; and
e. the beneficiary account number where such an account is used to process the
transaction. In the absence of an account, a unique transaction reference number
should be included which permits traceability of the transaction.
ii. In case of batch transfer, where several individual cross-border wire transfers from
a single originator are bundled in a batch file for transmission to beneficiaries, they
(i.e., individual transfers) are exempted from the requirements of clause (i) above in
respect of originator information, provided that they include the originator’s account
number or unique transaction reference number, as mentioned above, and the
batch file contains required and accurate originator information, and full beneficiary
information, that is fully traceable within the beneficiary country.
iii. Domestic wire transfer, where the originator is an account holder of the ordering
RE, shall be accompanied by originator and beneficiary information, as indicated for
cross-border wire transfers in (i) and (ii) above.
iv. Domestic wire transfers of rupees fifty thousand and above, where the originator is
not an account holder of the ordering RE, shall also be accompanied by originator
and beneficiary information as indicated for cross-border wire transfers. In case of
domestic wire transfers below rupees fifty thousand where the originator is not an
account holder of the ordering RE and where the information accompanying the wire
transfer can be made available to the beneficiary RE and appropriate authorities by
other means, it is sufficient for the ordering RE to include a unique transaction
reference number, provided that this number or identifier will permit the transaction
to be traced back to the originator or the beneficiary. Further, the ordering RE shall
make the information available within three working/business days of receiving the
request from the intermediary RE, beneficiary RE, or from appropriate competent
authorities.
v. REs shall ensure that all the information on the wire transfers shall be immediately
made available to appropriate law enforcement and/or prosecutorial authorities as
well as FIU-IND on receiving such requests with appropriate legal provisions.
vi. The wire transfer instructions are not intended to cover the following types of
payments:
a) Any transfer that flows from a transaction carried out using a credit card / debit
card / Prepaid Payment Instrument (PPI), including through a token or any other
similar reference string associated with the card / PPI, for the purchase of goods
or services, so long as the credit or debit card number or PPI id or reference
number accompanies all transfers flowing from the transaction. However, when
a credit or debit card or PPI is used as a payment system to effect a person-to-
person wire transfer, the wire transfer instructions shall apply to such
transactions and the necessary information should be included in the message.
b) Financial institution-to-financial institution transfers and settlements, where
both the originator person and the beneficiary person are regulated financial
institutions acting on their own behalf.
It is, however, clarified that nothing within these instructions will impact the obligation
of an RE to comply with applicable reporting requirements under PML Act, 2002, and
the Rules made thereunder, or any other statutory requirement in force.
Page 31 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
B. Responsibilities of ordering RE, intermediary RE and beneficiary RE, effecting
wire transfer, are as under:
i. Ordering RE:
a. The ordering RE shall ensure that all cross-border and qualifying domestic
wire transfers {viz., transactions as per clauses (iii) and (iv) of paragraph ‘A’
above}, contain required and accurate originator information and required
beneficiary information, as indicated above.
b. Customer Identification shall be made if a customer, who is not an account
holder of the ordering RE, is intentionally structuring domestic wire transfers
below rupees fifty thousand to avoid reporting or monitoring. In case of non-
cooperation from the customer, efforts shall be made to establish identity and if
the same transaction is found to be suspicious, STR may be filed with FIU-IND
in accordance with the PML Rules.
c. Ordering RE shall not execute the wire transfer if it is not able to comply with
the requirements stipulated in this section.
ii. Intermediary RE:
a. RE processing an intermediary element of a chain of wire transfers shall
ensure that all originator and beneficiary information accompanying a wire
transfer is retained with the transfer.
b. Where technical limitations prevent the required originator or beneficiary
information accompanying a cross-border wire transfer from remaining with a
related domestic wire transfer, the intermediary RE shall keep a record, for at
least five years, of all the information received from the ordering financial
institution or another intermediary RE.
c. Intermediary RE shall take reasonable measures to identify cross-border wire
transfers that lack required originator information or required beneficiary
information. Such measures should be consistent with straight-through
processing.
d. Intermediary RE shall have effective risk-based policies and procedures for
determining: (a) when to execute, reject, or suspend a wire transfer lacking
required originator or required beneficiary information; and (b) the appropriate
follow-up action including seeking further information and if the transaction is
found to be suspicious, reporting to FIU-IND in accordance with the PML Rules.
iii. Beneficiary RE:
a. Beneficiary RE shall take reasonable measures, including post-event
monitoring or real-time monitoring where feasible, to identify cross-border wire
transfers and qualifying domestic wire transfers {viz., transactions as per clauses
(iii) and (iv) of paragraph ‘A’ above}, that lack required originator information or
required beneficiary information.
b. Beneficiary RE shall have effective risk-based policies and procedures for
determining: (a) when to execute, reject, or suspend a wire transfer lacking
required originator or required beneficiary information; and (b) the appropriate
follow-up action follow-up action including seeking further information and if the
transaction is found to be suspicious, reporting to FIU-IND in accordance with
the PML Rules.
Page 32 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
iv. Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS) providers are required to comply
with all of the relevant requirements of this Section, whether they are providing
services directly or through their agents. In the case of a MTSS provider that
controls both the ordering and the beneficiary side of a wire transfer, the MTSS
provider:
a. shall take into account all the information from both the ordering and
beneficiary sides in order to determine whether an STR has to be filed; and
b. shall file an STR with FIU, in accordance with the PML Rules, if a transaction
is found to be suspicious.
C. Other Obligations
i. Obligations in respect of REs’ engagement or involvement with
unregulated entities in the process of wire transfer
REs shall be cognizant of their obligations under these instructions and ensure
strict compliance, in respect of engagement or involvement of any unregulated
entities in the process of wire transfer. More specifically, whenever there is
involvement of any unregulated entities in the process of wire transfers, the
concerned REs shall be fully responsible for information, reporting and other
requirements and therefore shall ensure, inter alia, that,
i) there is unhindered flow of complete wire transfer information, as mandated
under these directions, from and through the unregulated entities involved;
ii) the agreement / arrangement, if any, with such unregulated entities by REs
clearly stipulates the obligations under wire transfer instructions; and
iii) a termination clause is available in their agreement / arrangement, if any, with
such entities so that in case the unregulated entities are unable to support the
wire information requirements, the agreement / arrangement can be terminated.
Existing agreements / arrangements, if any, with such entities shall be reviewed
within three months to ensure aforementioned requirements.
ii. REs’ responsibility while undertaking cross-border wire transfer with
respect to name screening (such that they do not process cross-border
transactions of designated persons and entities)
REs are prohibited from conducting transactions with designated persons and
entities and accordingly, in addition to compliance with Chapter IX of the Master
Direction, REs shall ensure that they do not process cross-border transactions
of designated persons and entities.
iii. REs’ responsibility to fulfil record management requirements
Complete originator and beneficiary information relating to wire transfers shall be
preserved by the REs involved in the wire transfer, in accordance with Section
46 of the Master Direction.
Page 33 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
24. Obligations under Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and their Delivery
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 (WMD Act, 2005):
a. REs shall ensure meticulous compliance with the “Procedure for
Implementation of Section 12A of the Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) and
their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005” laid down in
terms of Section 12A of the WMD Act, 2005 vide Order dated January 30, 2023,
or any latest amendments updated by the Ministry of Finance, Government of
India.
b. In accordance with paragraph 3 of the aforementioned Order, REs shall ensure
not to carry out transactions in case the particulars of the individual / entity match
with the particulars in the designated list.
c. Further, REs shall run a check, on the given parameters, at the time of
establishing a relation with a customer and on a periodic basis to verify whether
individuals and entities in the designated list are holding any funds, financial
asset, etc., in the form of bank account, etc.
d. In case of match in the above cases, REs shall immediately inform the
transaction details with full particulars of the funds, financial assets or economic
resources involved to the Central Nodal Officer (CNO), designated as the
authority to exercise powers under Section 12A of the WMD Act, 2005. A copy of
the communication shall be sent to State Nodal Officer, where the account /
transaction is held and to the RBI. REs shall file an STR with FIUIND covering all
transactions in the accounts, covered above, carried through or attempted. It may
be noted that in terms of Paragraph 1 of the Order, Director, FIU-India has been
designated as the CNO.
e. REs may refer to the designated list, as amended from time to time, available
on the portal of FIU-India.
f. In case there are reasons to believe beyond doubt that funds or assets held by
a customer would fall under the purview of clause (a) or (b) of sub-section (2) of
Section 12A of the WMD Act, 2005, REs shall prevent such individual/entity from
conducting financial transactions, under intimation to the CNO by email, FAX and
by post, without delay.
g. In case an order to freeze assets under Section 12A is received by the Res
from the CNO, REs shall, without delay, take necessary action to comply with the
Order.
h. The process of unfreezing of funds, etc., shall be observed as per paragraph
7 of the Order. Accordingly, copy of application received from an individual/entity
regarding unfreezing shall be forwarded by RE along with full details of the asset
frozen, as given by the applicant, to the CNO by email, FAX and by post, within
two working days.
i. REs shall verify every day, the ‘UNSCR 1718 Sanctions List of Designated
Individuals and Entities‘, as available at https://www.mea.gov.in/Implementation-
of-UNSC-Sanctions-DPRK.htm, to take into account any modifications to the list
in terms of additions, deletions or other changes and also ensure compliance with
the ‘Implementation of Security Council Resolution on Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea Order, 2017’, as amended from time to time by the Central
Government.
j. In addition to the above, REs shall take into account – (a) other UNSCRs and
(b) lists in the first schedule and the fourth schedule of UAPA, 1967 and any
amendments to the same for compliance with the Government orders on
Page 34 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
implementation of Section 51A of the UAPA and Section 12A of the WMD Act.
k. REs shall undertake countermeasures when called upon to do so by any
international or intergovernmental organisation of which India is a member and
accepted by the Central Government.
25. Obligations under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) (UAPA) Act, 1967:
All offices shall ensure that in terms of Section 51A of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) (UAPA)
Act, 1967 and amendments thereto, they do not have any account in the name of individuals / entities
appearing in the lists of individuals and entities, suspected of having terrorist links, which are
approved by and periodically circulated by the United Nations Security Council (UNSC). The details
of the two lists are as under:
(a) The "ISIL (Da'esh) & Al-Qaida Sanctions List", established and maintained pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1267/1989/2253, which includes names of individuals and entities associated with
the Al-Qaida is available at
https://scsanctions.un.org/fop/fopxml=htdocs/resources/xml/en/consolidated.xml&xslt=htdocs/resou
rces/xsl/en/al-qaida-r.xsl
(b) The"Taliban Sanctions List”, established and maintained pursuant to Security Council resolution
1988 (2011), which includes names of individuals and entities associated with the Taliban is available
at
https://scsanctions.un.org/fop/fopxml=htdocs/resources/xml/en/consolidated.xml&xslt=htdocs/resou
rces/xsl/en/taliban-r.xsl.
All offices shall also ensure to refer to the lists as available in the Schedules to the Prevention and
Suppression of Terrorism (Implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007, as amended
from time to time. The aforementioned lists, i.e., UNSC Sanctions Lists and lists as available in the
Schedules to the Prevention and Suppression of Terrorism (Implementation of Security Council
Resolutions) Order, 2007, as amended from time to time, shall be verified on daily basis and any
modifications to the lists in terms of additions, deletions or other changes shall be taken into account
by all the offices for meticulous compliance.
Details of accounts resembling any of the individuals/entities in the lists shall be reported to FIU-IND
apart from advising Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) as required under UAPA notification dated
February 2, 2021 (Annex II of (Annex II of Master Direction - Know Your Customer (KYC) Direction,
2016 (Updated as on January 04, 2024).
Freezing of Assets under Section 51A of UAPA, 1967: The procedure laid down in the UAPA
Order dated February 2, 2021 (Annex II of Master Direction - Know Your Customer (KYC) Direction,
2016 (Updated as on January 04, 2024), shall be strictly followed and meticulous compliance with
the Order issued by the Government shall be ensured. The list of Nodal Officers for UAPA is available
on the website of MHA.
Page 35 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
Annexure I
CDD & OFFICIALLY VALID DOCUMENTS (OVD)
1. INDIVIDUALS
Officially Valid Documents (OVD) means the passport, the driving license, proof of
possession of Aadhaar number, the voters identity card issued by the election
commission of India, job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an Officer of the state
government and letter issued by the National Population Register containing details of
name and address.
Provided that,
a. where the Customer submits his proof of possession of Aadhaar number as an
OVD, he may submit it in such form as are issued by the Unique Identification
Authority of India.
b. where the OVD furnished by the Customer does not have updated address, the
following documents shall be deemed to be OVDs for the limited purpose of proof of
address:-
i. utility bill which is not more than two months old of any service provider (electricity,
telephone, post-paid mobile phone, piped gas, water bill).
ii. property or Municipal tax receipt.
iii. pension or family pension payment orders (PPOs) issued to retired employees by
Government Departments or Public Sector Undertakings if they contain the
address.
iv. letter of allotment of accommodation from employer issued by State Government
or Central Government Departments, statutory or regulatory bodies, public sector
undertakings, scheduled commercial banks, financial institutions and listed
companies and leave and license agreements with such employers allotting
official accommodation.
c. the Customer shall submit OVD with current address within a period of three months
of submitting deemed OVDs
d. where the OVD presented by a foreign national does not contain the details of
address, in such case the documents issued by the Government departments of
foreign jurisdictions and letter issued by the Foreign Embassy or Mission in India
shall be accepted as proof of address.
2. NON-INDIVIDUALS (Companies, Firms, Trusts etc.)
KYC norms are applicable to non-individuals also. The requirements are as under.
Certified copies of each of the following documents shall be obtained:
a) Certificate of incorporation with Memorandum & Articles of
Association
b) Resolution of Board of Directors for opening the account and
Legal entities
Power of Attorney / authorization of persons to operate the
(Companies)
account on its behalf
c) PAN allotment letter/ PAN of the Company
d) Documents as specified in para 1 above of the individuals holding
attorney /authorisation to transact on company’s behalf.
e) CDD of the Individual beneficial owner as detailed in para 6.3
Page 36 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
f) the names of the relevant persons holding senior management
position; and
g) the registered office and the principal place of its business, if it is
different.
Certified copies of each of the following documents shall be obtained:
a) Registration certificate.
b) Partnership deed.
c) PAN of the partnership firm
Partnership d) Documents as specified in para 1 above of the individuals holding
Firms attorney /authorisation to transact on its behalf.
e) the names of all the partners and address of the registered office,
and the principal place of its business, if it is different.
For opening an account, CDD of the individual (proprietor) as
mentioned in para 6.3 shall be carried out PLUS any two of the below
mentioned documents,
a) Registration certificate including Udyam Registration Certificate
(URC)
b) Certificate/License issued under Shops & Establishment Act
c) GST and Income Tax returns
d) GST registration certificate (provisional/ final)
Proprietary firms
e) Utility bills such as electricity, water, telephone bills etc.
f) Complete Income Tax Return (not just the acknowledgement) in
the name of the sole proprietor where the firm's income is reflected,
duly authenticated/acknowledged by the Income Tax authorities.
g) IEC (Import Export Code) issued to the proprietary concern by the
office of DGFT or Licence/certificate of practice issued in the name
of the proprietary concern by any professional body incorporated
under a statute.
In cases where the MAFIL is satisfied that it is not possible to furnish
two such documents, MAFIL may, at its discretion, accept only one of
those documents as proof of business/activity.
Provided MAFIL shall undertake contact point verification and collect
such other information and clarification as would be required to
establish the existence of such firm, and shall confirm and satisfy itself
that the business activity has been verified from the address of the
proprietary concern.
Page 37 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
Certified copies of each of the following documents shall be obtained:
a) Certificate of Registration;
b) Trust Deed
c) Power of Attorney authorizing a person to carry out transactions
on behalf of the trust
Trusts
d) Permanent Account Number or Form No.60 of the trust; and
e) such documents as are required for an individual under sub-rule
(1) relating to beneficial owner, managers, officers or employees,
as the case may be, holding an attorney to transact on its behalf
f) the names of the beneficiaries, trustees, settlor, protector and
authors of the trust and the address of the registered office of the
trust; and
list of trustees and documents as are required for individuals
under sub-rule (4) for those discharging role as trustee and
authorised to transact on behalf of the trust.
For opening an account of an unincorporated association or a body
of individuals, certified copies of each of the following documents
shall be obtained:
(a) Resolution of the managing body of such association or body of
individuals
Any
(b) Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 of the
unincorporated
association or unincorporated association or a body of individuals
a body of (c) Power of attorney granted to transact on its behalf
individuals
(d) Documents, as specified in Para 1, of the person holding an
attorney to transact on its behalf and
(e) Such information as may be required by MAFIL to collectively
establish the legal existence of such an association or body of
individuals.
Page 38 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
For opening accounts of juridical persons not specifically covered in
the earlier part, such as societies, universities and local bodies like
Juridical
village panchayats, certified copies of the following documents shall
persons not
specifically be obtained:
covered in the (a) Document showing name of the person authorised to act on
earlier part, behalf of the entity.
such as
(b) Documents, as specified in Para 1, of the individual holding an
societies,
attorney to transact on its behalf and
universities, and
(c) Such documents as may be required by MAFIL to establish the
local bodies like
village legal existence of such an entity/juridical person.
panchayats
Annexure II
REGULATED ENTITIES:
a. All Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs)/ Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)/ Local
Area Banks (LABs)/ All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks (UCBs) /State and
Central Co-operative Banks (StCBs / CCBs) and any other entity which has been
licensed under Section 22 of Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
b. All India Financial Institutions (AIFIs).
c. All Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs), Miscellaneous Non-Banking
Companies (MNBCs) and Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs).
d. All Payment System Providers (PSPs)/ System Participants (SPs) and Prepaid
Payment Instrument Issuers (PPI Issuers)
e. All authorized persons (APs) including those who are agents of Money Transfer
Service Scheme (MTSS), regulated by the Regulator.
f. Depository Participant (DP) service
Page 39 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
Annexure III
ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF SUSPICIOUS TRANSACTIONS
Broad categories of reasons for suspicion and examples of suspicious transactions
generally observed in Non- Banking Financial Companies are indicated as under:
1. IDENTITY OF CLIENT:
a) False identification documents
b) Identification documents which could not be verified within reasonable time
c) Accounts opened with names very close to other established business entities.
2. BACKGROUND OF CLIENT:
Suspicious background or links with known criminals.
3. MULTIPLE ACCOUNTS:
Large number of accounts having a common account holder, introducer, or authorized
personnel.
4. SIGNATORY WITH NO RATIONALE:
a) Unexplained transfers between multiple accounts with no rationale.
5. ACTIVITY IN ACCOUNTS:
a) Unusual activity compared with past transactions- Sudden activity in dormant
accounts;
b) Activity inconsistent with what would be expected from declared business.
6. NATURE OF TRANSACTIONS:
a) Unusual or unjustified complexity.
b) No economic rationale or bonafide purpose.
c) Frequent cash transactions.
d) Nature of transactions inconsistent with what would be expected from declared
business.
7. VALUE OF TRANSACTIONS:
a) Value just under the reporting threshold amount in an apparent attempt to avoid
reporting.
b) Value inconsistent with the client’s apparent financial standing.
Page 40 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
8. INDICATORS OF SUSPICIOUS TRANSACTIONS:
a) Reluctant to part with information, data, and documents.
b) Submission of false documents, purpose of loan and detail of accounts.
c) Reluctance to furnish details of source of funds.
d) Reluctance to meet in person, representing through power of attorney.
e) Approaching a distant branch away from own address.
f) Maintaining multiple accounts without explanation.
g) Payment of initial contribution through unrelated third-party account.
h) Suggesting dubious means for sanction of loan.
i) Where transactions do not make economic sense.
j) Where doubt about beneficial ownership.
k) Encashment of loan through a fictitious bank account.
l) Sale consideration quoted higher or lower than prevailing prices.
m) Request for payment in favor of third party with no relation to transaction.
n) Usage of loan amount for purposes other than stipulated in connivance with
vendors, or agent.
o) Frequent request for change of address.
p) Over-payment of instalments with a request to refund the overpaid amount
Page 41 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
Annexure IV
CUSTOMERS OF SPECIAL CATEGORY (CSC):
SPECIAL CATEGORY CUSTOMERS IDENTIFIABLE IN DP :-
a. Non-Resident Customers
b. High Net worth Customers,
c. Trust, Charities, NGOs, and organizations receiving donations
d. Companies having close family shareholdings or beneficial ownership
e. Politically exposed persons (PEP) of foreign origin
f. Current / Former Head of State, Current or Former Senior High-profile politicians and
connected persons (immediate family, Close advisors and companies in which such
individuals have interest or significant influence)
g. Companies offering foreign exchange services.
h. Customers in high risk countries (where existence / effectiveness of money
laundering controls is suspect, where there is unusual banking secrecy, Countries
active in narcotics production, Countries where corruption (as per Transparency
International Corruption Perception Index) is highly prevalent, Countries against
which government sanctions are applied, Countries reputed to be any of the following
– Havens / sponsors of international terrorism, offshore financial centres, tax havens,
countries where fraud is highly prevalent. ( In accordance with FATF list of high risk
and monitored jurisdictions (https://www.fatf-gafi.org/countries/)
i. Non face to face Customers.
j. Customers with dubious reputation as per public information available etc. The
above-mentioned list is only illustrative and not exclusive
Page 42 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
Annexure V
DIGITAL KYC PROCESS (RBI GUIDELINES)
A. The RE shall develop an application for digital KYC process which shall be made
available at Customer touch points for undertaking KYC of their Customers and the
KYC process shall be undertaken only through this authenticated application of the
REs.
B. The access of the Application shall be controlled by the REs and it should be ensured
that the same is not used by unauthorized persons. The Application shall be accessed
only through login-id and password or Live OTP or Time OTP controlled mechanism
given by REs to its authorized officials. C. The Customer, for the purpose of KYC, shall
visit the location of the authorized official of the RE or vice-versa. The original OVD shall
be in possession of the Customer.
C. The RE must ensure that the Live photograph of the Customer is taken by the authorized
officer and the same photograph is embedded in the Customer Application Form (CAF).
Further, the system Application of the RE shall put a water-mark in readable form having
CAF number, GPS coordinates, authorized official’s name, unique employee Code
(assigned by REs) and Date (DD:MM:YYYY) and time stamp (HH:MM:SS) on the
captured live photograph of the Customer.
D. The Application of the RE shall have the feature that only live photograph of the
Customer is captured and no printed or video-graphed photograph of the Customer is
captured. The background behind the Customer while capturing live photograph should
be of white colour and no other person shall come into the frame while capturing the live
photograph of the Customer.
E. Similarly, the live photograph of the original OVD or proof of possession of Aadhaar
where offline verification cannot be carried out (placed horizontally), shall be captured
vertically from above and watermarking in readable form as mentioned above shall be
done. No skew or tilt in the mobile device shall be there while capturing the live
photograph of the original documents.
F. The live photograph of the Customer and his original documents shall be captured in
proper light so that they are clearly readable and identifiable.
G. Thereafter, all the entries in the CAF shall be filled as per the documents and information
furnished by the Customer. In those documents where Quick Response (QR) code is
available, such details can be auto populated by scanning the QR code instead of
manual filing the details. For example, in case of physical Aadhaar/e-Aadhaar
downloaded from UIDAI where QR code is available, the details like name, gender, date
of birth and address can be auto-populated by scanning the QR available on Aadhaar/e-
Aadhaar.
Once the above-mentioned process is completed, a One Time Password (OTP) message
containing the text that ‘Please verify the details filled in form before sharing OTP’ shall be
sent to Customer’s own mobile number. Upon successful validation of the OTP, it will be
treated as Customer signature on CAF. However, if the Customer does not have his/her
Page 43 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential
own mobile number, then mobile number of his/her family/relatives/known persons may be
used for this purpose and be clearly mentioned in CAF. In any case, the mobile number of
the authorized officer registered with the RE shall not be used for Customer signature. The
RE must check that the mobile number used in Customer signature shall not be the mobile
number of the authorized officer.
H. The authorized officer shall provide a declaration about the capturing of the live
photograph of Customer and the original document. For this purpose, the authorized
official shall be verified with One Time Password (OTP) which will be sent to his mobile
number registered with the RE. Upon successful OTP validation, it shall be treated as
authorized officer’s signature on the declaration. The live photograph of the authorized
official shall also be captured in this authorized officer’s declaration.
I. After all these activities, the Application shall give information about the completion of
the process and submission of activation request to activation officer of the RE and
generate the transaction-id/reference-id number of the process. The authorized officer
shall intimate the details regarding transaction-id/reference-id number to Customer for
future reference.
k) The authorized officer of the RE shall check and verify that:- (i) information available in
the picture of document matches the information entered by authorized officer in CAF.
(ii) live photograph of the Customer matches with the photo available in the document.;
and (iii) all of the necessary details in CAF including mandatory field are filled properly.
l) On Successful verification, the CAF shall be digitally signed by authorized officer of the
RE who will take a print of CAF, get signatures/thumb-impression of Customer at
appropriate place, then scan and upload the same in system. Original hard copy may be
returned to the Customer.
Page 44 of 44 Classification: Internal
Document Classification : Confidential