RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud
Risk Management in Banks
Key changes and their impact
August 2024
Contents
01
Introduction – Master Direction on
Fraud Risk Management in Banks
02
Key changes in regulations and
their impact on banks
03
Key actions for banks
04
How PwC can help
2 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
Introduction –
Master Direction
on Fraud Risk
Management in
Banks
On 15 July 2024, the Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) issued the Master Direction on Fraud Risk
Management in Banks, namely Reserve Bank of
India (Fraud Risk Management in Commercial
Banks (including Regional Rural Banks) and
All India Financial Institutions) Directions, 2024
(Ref:RBI/DOS/2024-25/118DOS.CO.FMG.SEC.
No.5/23.04.001/2024-25).1
These directions will supersede the earlier
directions on the subject, namely Reserve Bank
of India (Frauds - Classification and Reporting by
commercial banks and select FIs) Directions 2016
(Ref.DBS.CO.CFMC.BC.No.1/23.04.001/2016-17)
dated 1 July 2016 (updated as on 3 July 2017).
The directions are issued to establish a framework
for banks to prevent, detect early, and promptly
report fraud incidents to law enforcement agencies
(LEAs), the RBI, and National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development (NABARD), as well as to
facilitate the dissemination of related information
by the RBI and address associated matters.
1 https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/
PDFs/118MDE97B8ED9A09B4B21BE7FDDE5F836CD09.PDF
3 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
Classification of frauds as per the new master direction
Misappropriation of funds and criminal Wilful falsification, destruction, alteration,
1 breach of trust 7 mutilation of any book, electronic record,
paper, writing, valuable security or
account with intent to defraud*
Fraudulent encashment through forged Cash shortages on account
2 instruments 8 of frauds*
Manipulation of books of accounts Fraudulent transactions involving
3 or through fictitious accounts and 9 foreign exchange
conversion of property
Cheating by concealment of facts with Fraudulent electronic banking/digital
4 the intention to deceive any person and 10 payment related transactions committed
cheating by impersonation* on non-banking financial companies
(NBFCs)*
Forgery with the intention to commit Other type of fraudulent activity not
5 fraud by making any false documents/ 11 covered under any of the above
electronic records*
Fraudulent credit facilities extended for
6 illegal gratification
*These categories are newly added or updated in the Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management issued on 15 July 2024.
4 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
Key changes to the regulations and their
impact on banks
I. Governance and accountability for fraud risk management (FRM)
Clause Key regulations/updates to regulations PwC’s perspective
Applicability Applicability of the regulations is • The expansion of the FRM regulations
expanded from only scheduled to RRBs, LABs, Exim Bank, etc., will
commercial banks and select financial enhance the FRM culture across the wider
institutions (FIs) to include regional rural industry and promote a standardised
banks (RRBs), local area banks (LABs), approach to FRM. Fraudsters who could
corresponding new banks, Exim Bank, not penetrate a scheduled bank exploited
NABARD, National Bank for Financing vulnerabilities in systems and controls of
Infrastructure and Development these banks to perpetrate fraud. As such,
(NaBFID), National Housing Bank (NHB) these regulations will help lay a strong
and Small Industries Development Bank foundation for a robust FRM framework.
of India (SIDBI). • Accountability and governance of fraud
at the board level will increase as the
Focus on Increased focus on fraud prevention
policy will be board approved and its
FRM and FRM rather than just detection and
special committee will oversee effective
reporting of frauds which is reflective
implementation. Further, the committee
in the change in the name of the
will be headed by an independent
master direction from ‘classification
director(s), which will dilute the influence
and reporting of frauds’ to ‘Fraud Risk
of a bank’s senior leadership in the
Management’.
determination of a red-flagged/fraud
Board Emphasis on board approved policy accounts, which was seen in many
approved outlining roles and responsibilities high-profile cases.
policy of board/committees and senior • A dedicated senior role for overall
management (SM) and containing fraud monitoring and reporting of frauds
prevention and early detection measures within the risk function is a progressive
including ensuring compliance with step in embedding and institutionalising
the principle of natural justice (issue an anti-fraud culture within banks.
of show cause notice [SCN]), which The responsibility of successful
is a significant update to the previous implementation of FRM lies with the SM.
circular.
• The provision of the principle of natural
Special The monetary threshold of INR 10 million justice allowing for serving of SCN
committee of for Special Committee of the Board to borrowers will provide a legitimate
the board for Monitoring and Follow-up of Cases opportunity to borrowers to present
of Frauds (SCBMF) is removed, and it their perspective backed by supporting
shall now be headed by independent or arguments and documentation, if any, to
non-executive directors to oversee the banks before their account is classified as
effectiveness of FRM. fraud. The onus will be on the lenders to
carefully assess the merit of such claims
Embedding Embedding FRM in the risk function with
before making a determination, which, if
FRM in risk a dedicated senior-level role for overall
not is in the borrower’s interest, could be
monitoring and reporting of frauds.
challenged in the court of law.
5 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
II. Early warning signals (EWS), red flagging and Investigations
Clause Key regulations/updates to regulations PwC’s perspective
EWS and • Stress on board approved EWS and • Currently, banks have a fragmented
red flagging RFA framework under the overall approach towards the EWS framework
of accounts FRM policy with supervision of its with critical aspects regarding data,
(RFA) effectiveness by the Risk Management technology, processes and people
Committee of the Board (RMCB) operating in silos. There is also a lack of
independence in the EWS assessment
• Threshold of INR 500 million for
with business teams (retail/wholesale)
flagging and reporting removed
taking views on large accounts instead
• EWS system integration with core of risk defeating the purpose of the
banking solution that shall connect framework. Embedding the EWS and RFA
EWS to customer profile and other data framework within the board approved
• Also, EWS framework for other FRM policy with RMCB supervising
banking/non-credit related transactions its effectiveness will set up a strong
has been introduced foundation for the EWS framework.
• Inclusion of EWS for non-credit
Data Set up a dedicated DA and MI unit to
transactions is a significant change, and
analytics (DA) facilitate collection and processing of
it will require banks to integrate early
and market relevant information to enable early
warning triggers in their existing fraud
intelligence detection of fraud. This unit shall monitor
monitoring framework to identify unusual
(MI) unit both credit and non-credit transactions
patterns and activities in transactions
to identify unusual patterns and
through digital platforms. This integration
activities.
will require system/process changes,
External/ Banks will be required to appoint an training, time and investments as EWS is
internal audit external auditor or perform an internal currently limited to loan accounts.
of RFA audit for investigation of a red-flagged
• While many large banks do have a DA unit,
account.
the requirement to have a dedicated ‘DA
and market intelligence unit’ to not only
Policy on Policy on engagement of external
collect and analyse information on loan
engagement auditors for RFA investigation covering
accounts but also analyse transactions
of external due diligence, competency and track
to identify unusual patterns will require
auditors record of auditors, etc
investments and capability enhancements
on a large scale at banks, particularly
Classification Completion of the process of
small banks such as RRBs and LABs.
of accounts classification as a fraud or removal of
Banks will be required to onboard
as fraud RFA status within 180 days of reporting
people with field intelligence skills and
such account
experience as their own staff is not trained
Investigation Borrowing accounts of related on these skills.
of group companies (sharing common promoters
companies or directors) of a company whose
account is identified as fraud will also
be investigated for fraud by the banks
involved.
6 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
III. Fraud reporting
Clause Key regulations/updates to regulations PwC’s perspective
Reporting of Reporting of frauds committed within • With the introduction of reporting of
group entities group entities, including domestic and frauds in non-regulated group entities
overseas subsidiaries, affiliates, etc., of banks to the RBI, the anti-fraud
to the RBI separately. This requirement governance in the group entities will
applies regardless of whether the entity likely be strengthened considering the
operates in the financial or non-financial impact it can have on the entire group.
sector. This is driven by a few recent cases of
enforcements, wherein non-regulated
group entities had influence in the day-to-
day operations and management of the
Fraud at Reporting of fraud at overseas branches RBI regulated entity.
overseas to the respective local law enforcement
• The fraud reporting timeline is reduced
branches authorities in compliance with the
from 3 weeks to 2 weeks which will
applicable laws and regulations of the
require robust processes for fraud
host countries
detection and determination. This means
that activities such as fraud detection,
Timeline of • Reporting of each individual fraud its classification and review by SM, its
reporting case promptly, within 14 days from its committees and the final determination
classification, regardless of the amount needs to happen within 2 weeks, for
involved which the operationalisation of the FRM
framework is critical.
• Notification to the Fraud Monitoring
Group (FMG), Department of • It was observed in many cases that banks
Supervision (DOS) and the RBI of were reporting names of people/entities
instances involving theft, burglary, who may not have been involved in the
dacoity and robbery (including alleged fraud in their FMR reporting,
attempted cases), within 7 days of their which led to many senior executives/
occurrence persons being named in such returns.
The amendment in the regulations to call
Persons/ Banks should not report persons/entities this out will go a long way in ensuring
entities not who are not involved or associated with that the anti-fraud function in banks does
involved in the fraud in the FMR. its due diligence before reporting such
fraud details in FMR.
7 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
Key actions for banks
Effective FRM framework
Strategy and mission
Board: Governance and accountability (FRM policy and procedures, tone at the top, etc. )
Executive committees (e.g. special committees, RMCB, regulatory fraud reporting,
whistleblower complaints, internal frauds review counsel)
Senior management (anti-fraud function within risk)
Lines of Products and services Channels and core Metrics,
defence reporting, and
• Loans • Branch banking
dashboards
• Current account savings • Virtual channels like
account internet banking and
First line/ Regulatory
business unit • Card mobile banking reporting
• Trade finance services • Phone banking
• Commercial business • Core banking system
Second line/ MI and KPIs
banking
fraud risk
• Digital banking
control unit
• Payments/wallets and UPI
Internal fraud
• Merchant acquiring dashboard/
• E-commerce reporting
Third parties Employee frauds
• Third-party agents and • Favouritism
service providers • Bribery and corruption
• Favouritism • Conflict of interest
• Kickbacks • Code of conduct
• Ethics and conduct
• Payment-related frauds
Fraud risk assessment
Communication, continuous training and feedback
Fraud prevention and detection framework
Transaction monitoring DA Market intelligence
EWS/RFA triggers Whistleblower framework
Third line of defence/internal audit
8 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
Strategic Initiatives for an effective FRM
Special committee of board Board approved policy
Constitute an SCBMF headed by an independent Develop a board approved policy on FRM, clearly
director/non-executive director that shall oversee defining roles and responsibilities of the board/
effectiveness of FRM in banks. committees, SM and measures for fraud prevention
and detection, including provisions on principle of
natural justice.
Dedicated FRM role in risk Policy for auditors’ engagement
Appoint a senior official at the rank of at least a Develop a policy on engagement of external
general manager or equivalent for monitoring and auditors covering aspects such as due diligence,
reporting of frauds. competency and track record of the auditors.
EWS framework Reporting of fraud
Set up/upgrade EWS framework by 15 Jan 2025. Comply with new reporting requirements of fraud/
The EWS framework integrated with core banking RFA to LEAs and the RBI, including reporting of
should be comprehensive, incorporating both fraudulent transactions related to payment systems
quantitative and qualitative indicators, and should Central Payments Fraud Information Registry
provide for periodic review of the credit sanction/ (CPFIR), fraud pertaining to group entities not
monitoring process. regulated by the RBI, and frauds at an overseas
group entity.
EWS for non-credit transactions DA and MI unit
Implement EWS system to monitor other banking Set up a DA and MI unit, which shall facilitate
or non-credit related transactions. collection of relevant information to enable early
detection and prevention of fraud. The unit will
monitor and analyse both credit and non-credit
transactions.
9 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
How PwC can help
Development of policy, FRM Enhancement and compliance
01 03
framework and training of reporting mechanism
EWS framework enhancement Supporting fraud prevention
02 04
and implementation support through DA and MI
Points to consider
• PwC can help in developing a robust FRM • Assist in meeting the revised reporting
governance framework by benchmarking with requirements, ensuring integration of relevant
the regulatory requirement and designing training systems, and accurate and timely submissions.
programmes based on the updated guidelines.
• We can support in designing the DA and MI
• We can support in developing, enhancing and strategy and set up the DA and MI unit by
implementing EWS by reviewing the framework bringing in the relevant knowledge, experience
and scenarios, ensuring effective early fraud and technology.
detection.
10 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
Our accelerators: 1. Due diligence and intelligence platform
Our automated intelligence platform Prudence+ can perform due diligence and gather intelligence on
individuals or entities accurately and effectively, thus complementing a bank’s EWS framework and
strengthening its FRM framework.
Prudence+ is a client-facing workflow Each request triggers a workflow and
1 application built by PwC India to assist 4 PwC staff is intimated about the same.
clients in streamlining their due
diligence requests.
It is a web application that connects Reports and supporting
2 PwC’s Intelligence team with its 5 documentation are also uploaded
clients. onto PwC’s Prudence+ and are always
available for the client to review.
Clients or vendors can submit due It offers audit trails and dashboards
3 diligence requests by filling in key details 6 to help PwC and its clients in tracking
such as target names, indicia and related requests and reports.
documentation.
PwC’s Prudence+
Client or vendor-initiated requests
PwC reports
Client reviews
11 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
Our accelerators: 2. Proactive fraud monitoring
Our fraud detection solution detects document and image forgery. It can be integrated with a bank’s
onboarding/customer relationship management (CRM), loan origination system (LOS) or other systems to
detect the document frauds relating to KYC, loan documentation, employee expenses and vendor claims.
An integrated fraud analytics platform
Import data Business rule Image and PDF Visualisation
from multiple engine metadata tampering
sources analytics
• ERP and • Leverage • Using AI and • Identify and • Interactive
non-ERP business machine localise dashboards
• Internal and and policy learning (ML) instances of and
external knowledge in • Document tampering of transaction-
• Cloud combination tampering/ PDFs with wise data
with optical dedupe/ the use of • Automation
• Integrate
character classification PDF editing of reports
with apps
recognition for scenarios services at designed
and services
(OCR)/natural of ghost billing frequencies
language and collusion
processing amongst
(NLP) employees
capabilities for
powerful rules
and better
exceptions
generation.
The advantages
Flexible deployment options Automated process – 100% coverage of
transactions
Efficient and more accurate – better Efficient modus operandi in mitigating
insights into fraud management/risk risks and identifying fraud typologies
assessment
Investigative efficiency – deeper insights Cost-effective – power of one platform
into risks, enabling quicker resolution
12 PwC | RBI’s Master Direction on Fraud Risk Management in Banks
About PwC
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms
in 151 countries with over 360,000 people who are committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory
and tax services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal
entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
© 2024 PwC. All rights reserved.
Contact us
Puneet Garkhel
Partner and Forensic Dhruv Chawla
Services Leader Partner, Risk Consulting
M: +91 9820320181 M: +(91) 8130166550
E: puneet.garkhel@pwc.com E: dhruv.chawla@pwc.com
Induvant Tomar
Director, Financial Crime
Compliance – Forensic Services
M: +(91) 9560833555
E: induvant.tomar@pwc.com
pwc.in
Data Classification: DC0 (Public)
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in
India having Corporate Identity Number or CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of
PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which is a separate legal entity.
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or
derived from sources believed by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does
not represent that this information is accurate or complete. Any opinions or estimates contained in this document
represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. Readers of this publication
are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they
are entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any
responsibility or liability to any reader of this publication in respect of the information contained within it or for any
decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take.
© 2024 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved.
AW/August 2024 - M&C 40148